THE 

SACRED  BOOKS  OF  THE  HINDUS. 


TRANSLATED  BY  VARIOUS  SANSKRIT  SCHOLARS. 


EDITED  BY 

MAJOR  B.  D,  BASU,  IM.S-Retd. 


VOL.  Vi.-THE  VAlSESIKA  SUTRAS  OF  KAN, 

~K^*LK  « 

^ 


NANDALAL  SINHA,   M.  A.,  B   L. 


OF  THE  BEHAR   AND  ORtSSA  OEVEL  SER 


SECOND  EDITION— REVISED    AND  ENLARGED. 


PUBLISHED  BY 

SUDHINDRA   NATH  BASU  M.B. 

THE   PANINI   OFFICE,    BEUVANE&WARl   l^RAMA, 
BAHADURGANJ, 
Allahabad. 

PRINTED    BY   KASHINATH!  BAJPAYA    AT   THE    VIJAYA    PRESS 

1923. 


B 


\b-K3 


P  K  E  F  A  C  E. 

The  Vai&esika  SiUraa  of  Kanada,  with  the  Commentary  of  San- 
kara  Misra  aiid  extracts  from  tho  gloss  of  Jayanarayana  and  the* 
Bhasya  of  Chandrakanta,  was  first  published  in  tho  years  1910  and 
1911.'  Inspite  of  the  numerous  imperfections  of  the  work,  it  appears 
to  have  awakened  a  lively  interest  in  the  study  and  propagation 
of  one  of  the  oldest  systems  of  Hindu  Philosophy.  For,  its  publica 
tion  lias  been  followed  by  a  number  of  very  valuable  contributions  to 
the  literature  of  the  subject  from  the  pen  of  some  eminent  scholars. 
First  and  foremost  amongst  them  is  the  Positive  Sciences  of  the.  Ancient 
Hind-tut  by  Dr.  Brajendranath  Seal,  M.  A.  Ph.  D.  (1915).  Dr.  Seal 
observes  that  "Hindu  scientific  ideas  aud  methodology  (e.  g.  the  in 
ductive  method  or  methods  of  algebraic  analysis),have  deeply  influienced 
the  course  of  natural  philosophy  in  Asia — in  the  East  as  well  aa  in  the 

"West in    China    and    Japan,    as    well  as  in  the  Saracen  Empirec'.  and 

enters  into  "a  comparative  estimate  of  Greek  and  Hindu  sconce". 
He  gives  very  lucid  expositions  of  the  Nyaya-Vaisesika  Themical  The- 
oi-v,  of  the  conception  of  Molecular  Motion  (Parispanda),  and  of  the 
idons  of  Mechanics  (Kinetics)  and  Acoustics,  and  deals  very  fully  with 
the  Doctrine  of  Scientific  Method.  In  the  following  year  (I9l6y,  that 
accomplished  scholar,  Dr.  Ganganaiha  Jha,  M.  A.,  D.  Litt.,  came  out  \\ith 
an  English  translation  of  the  Paddrtha-Dharma-Sam'jraha, — the  Maynum, 
Opus  of  the  Vaisesikas — ,  that  is,  Prasastpada's  Bhasya  on  the  Vaisesi- 
ka  Sutras  of  Kanada,  with  ^ridhara's  Commentary  (Nyayakandali)  on 
the  Bhfisya.  In  tho  Introduction  he  explains  the  Vaisesika  conception 
of  Bhuta  (  'element'),  and  points  out  that  "what  tthe  Vaisesika  means 
by  saying  that  these  are  the  'five  bhutas',  is  that  there  are  five  states  of 
matter:  solid  (Earth),  liquid  (Water),  gaseous  (Air),  luminous  (Fire),  and 
ethcric  (AkAfia*)."  The  notes  he  has  added  in  the  body  of  the  book  are 
very  illuminating,  and  clear  up  many  obscure  points  in  he  text.  In 
the  year  1917,  was  published  the  Dasa-Paddrtha.-Sdstra:  Chinese  Text 
(translation),  with  Introduction,  Translation  and  Note*,  by  H-  Ui,  Pro 
fessor  in  the  Sotoshu  College,  Tokyo,  under  the  editorship  of  F.  W. 
Thomas  Esquire.  It  is  a  remarkable  publication  in  many  ways.  In  the 
Jirst  place,  it  presents  us  with  a  Chinese  version  of  the  tenets  of  Kanada 
in  the  form  of  Kwei-ci's  quotations,  probably  from  a  commentary  on  the 
treatise.  The  author  tells  us  that  the  treatise  was  composed^  by  a 
follower  of  the  Vaisesika,  named  Mati  Chandra,  and  translated  into 
Chinese  by  Yuan  Chvvang  in  648  A.  D.  It  is  in  the  form  of  a  cateciismr 
and,  as  a  catechism  of  the  doctrines  of  the  later  school  of  the  Vaiseskas, 
it  is  almost  unsurpassed.  In  the  second  place,  the  author  has  compiled 
from  Chinese  records  an  account  of  the  traditions  current  among  Chi 
nese  scholars  respecting  Kanada,  his  work,  and  his  school.  His  resear 
ches  fully  confirm  our  view  of  the  great  antiquity  and  popularity  of  the 
Vaisesika-Siitras.  Last  but  not  least  is  Indian  Logic  and  Atomism  (1921) 
which  is  an  exposition  of  the  Nyaya  and  Vaisesika  Systems,  by  A.  B 
Keith,  D.  C.  L.,  D.  Litt.,  a  well-known  orientalist.  He  regards  them  "ag 
able  and  earnest  efforts  to  solve  the  problems  of  knowledge  ard  being 
on  the  basis  of  reasoned  argument".  He  has  attempted  "to  set  out  the 


fundamental  d< cirii  ts  <  I  il  e  Ms1<  u  s  \\iih  clue  ieg»id  to  their  history- 
and  their  relations  to  Buddhist  j  hilosoj  hy".  Jt  is  gratifying  to: 
find  that,  as  in  the  ancient  past,  even  so  at  the  present  day,  the 
Vaisesika  has  engaged  the  attention  of  earnest  students  all  over  the- 
world. 

Now,  what  is  the  Vaisesika  Darsana  V  We  do  not  know  when  or 
by  whom  the  name  'Vaisesika'  was  first  applied  to  the  teachings  of 
Kanada.  In  the  Sutras  the  word  appears  only  once  (in  X.  ii.  7)  where 
it  means  'characteristic',  'distinguishing'.  According  to  the  rule  of 
.Paniui,  IV.  iii.  87,  the  word  is  derived  from  the  word  'Visesa',  meanintr 
'a  treatise  on  Visesa'.  The  word  'visesa'  has  various  meanings  ;  e.  g. 
species,  distinction,  difference,  excellence,  superiority.  Accordingly- 
the  word  'Vaisesika'  also  has  been  variously  interpreted.  "The  origin 
of  the  name",  in  one  view,,  "is  in  the  fact  that  the  system  is  distingui 
shed  from,  and  superior  to,  the  Sfunkhya''.  In  another  view,  "fcho  work 
was  named  the  Vaifiesika  sastra,  .since,  it  excelled  other  works  in  all 
respects,  or  because  it  was  composed  by  a  man  of  superior  intelligence". 
h  third  view  is  that  it  is  called  Vaisesika,  because  it  particular!}'  or 
specifically  treats  of  Genus,  Species,  and  Combination  which  have  not 
been  dealt  with  in  any  other  treatise  and  though  they  are  included  in 
the  predicables  Substance,  etc.  In  a  fourth  view,  it  is  distinguished 
.from  the  Samkhya  in  its  theory  of  Buddhi  (understanding),  natnelv 
that  Buddhi  is  an  attribute  of  the  Soul,  and  not  its  instrument  of  know 
ledge.  In  another  view,  it  is  distinguished  from  the  System  of  Jaimini 
in  so  far  as  it  declares  that  the  highest  good  is  to  be  achieved  by  the 
renunciation  of  the  things  of  the  world  and  by  the  contemplation  of 
Truth,  and  not  by  positive  performances.  Lastly,  it  is  explained  that 
Kanada's  system  has  come  to  be  called  "Vaisesika''  from  his  theory  of 
'visesa'  inhering  in  the  ultimate  atoms  (I.  ii.  6).  His  atoms  are  'math 
ematical  points',  without  parts,  and  possessing  the  same  attribute  and 
activity  in  their  respective  classes  of  'Earth',  'Water',  'Fire',  and  'Air'. 
It  is  by  means  of  their  'visesas'  or  individual  characteristics  that  thev 
are  distinguished  from  one  another,  and  account  for  the  variety  of 
things  in  nature.  This  last  explanation  appears  to  be  preferable  to  till 
the  others 

The  Vaisesika  is  a  Mohsa-silatra;  it  teaches  u  doctrine  of  release 
release  from  the  coil  of  mortality.  According  to  Kauada,  man  must 
work  out  his  own  salvation.  It  is  given  to  him,  if  he  will,  to  hear  the 
Truth  from  the  Scriptures  or  from  a  preceptor,  on  high  or  here  below 
to  think  over  it  in  his  mind,  and  to  meditate  upon  it  in  the  recesses  of 
his  heart.  He  can  control  his  sensory  and  motor  organs,  and,  by 
eliminating  superficial  psychic  states,  make  the  mind  steady  in  the 
Soul.  Steadiness  of  the  mind  in  the  Soul  is  called  Yoga.  Yoga  is 
neither  a  mystery  nor  is  it  mysticism.  It  is  the  realisation  of  the  free 
dom  of  will,  of  the  free  Self.  He  then  becomes  master  of  time  and  space. 
.For  him  there  is  no  distinction  of  past,  present,  and  future  ;  no  disti 
nction  of  here,  there,  and  elsewhere.  The  mind  being  at  rest,  pleasure 
and  pain  do  not  arise,  activity  ceases,  and  the  law  of  Karma  is  cancell- 
ed  for  all  time  to  come.  The  accumulated  Karma  of  the  past,  however 
remains.  Having  realised  the  fundamental  freedom  of  the  Self,  he 
sees  what  experiences  are  in  store  for  him,  and  lives  out  those  exper 
iences  in  appropriate  forms  and  surroundings  brought  about  by  the- 


•creative  power  of  will.  In  this  way  he  cancels  the  past  as  well.  There 
after,  when  death  takes  place,  and  the  soul  finally  quits  its  temporal 
«.bode,  it  does  not  pass  into  other  forms  of  finite  life,  but  remains  free 
for  ever  till  the  end  of  Time.  That  freedom  is  called  Moksa,  the  supremo 
good,  the  be-all  and  end-all  of  existence. 

Self-knowledge,  Self-realisation,  Atma-saksatkara,  is  then  the  only 
means  of  attaining  Moksa.  The  fundamental  teaching  of  Kanada, 
therefore,  is  "tattva-jnanat  nihsreyasam",  the  supreme  good  results- 
from  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  about  the  Soul.  It  is  a  translation  of 
the  Vedic  text,  "Tarati  sokaui  Atma-vit",  the  knower  of  the  Self  over 
comes  Evil. 

The  Soul  is  therefore  to  bo  known.  Kauada  shows  how  it  is  to  be 
known.  Hence  the  Vaisesika  Sastra  is  also  called  Adhydtma  Sdstra,  a 
treatise  respecting  the  Soul.  It  was  not  necessary  for  him  to  call 
Attention  to  the  nature  of  the  Soul  in  itself,  the  pure  Soul  as  it  was  in 
the  beginning  and  as  it  will  be  in  the  end.  It  was  enough  for  his  pur 
pose  to  demonstrate  the  nature  of  the  Soul  in  the  interval  of  Time,  the 
suffering  Soul,  the  Soul  revolving  on  the  wheel  of  births  and  deaths 
and  re-births  under  the  Law  of  Karma.  The  universal  experience  of 
Suffering  ("Duhkha")  compels  an  enquiry  as  to  the  means  of  its  removal,, 
namely,  realisation  of  the  truth  about  the  Soul  ;  and  Kauada's  view  is 
that  the  Soul  can  be  known  by  means  of  the  Not-Soul. 

The  Soul  and  the  Not-Soul  make  up  Reality.  The  Real  is  that 
which  is  knowablo  and  nameable-Reality  therefore  consists  of  Padar- 
thas,  nameables  or  predicables.  They  are  not  merely  categoric  -f 
Teought,  in  the  sense  that  they  have  no  existence  outside  and  indepen 
dent  of  thought.  They  are  classes  of  entities  which  have  an  existence 
antecedent  to,  and  independent  of,  our  thought.  They  become  objects 
of  our  thought,  they  are-knowable  and  nameable,  because  they  exist. 
"In  pure  perception  we  are  actually  placed  outside  ourselves,  we  touch, 
the  reality  of  fch«-  object  in  an  immediate  intuition  "(Bergson).  Tattva- 
aaksatkara,  immediate  intuition  of  reality,  is  the  aim  of  Kauada's  phil 
osophy. 

By  a  subtle  process  of  analysis  and  synthesis,  Kanada  divides  all 
nameable  things  into  six  classes:  viz.  substance,  attribute,  action,  genus, 
species,  and  combination.  He  then  shows,  that  atfcrribute  and  action 
exist  by  oombinaton  with  substance.  Without  substance,  there  were- 
no  attribute  and  action.  Similarly,  genus  and  species  are  correlative, 
and  are  not  absolute,  except  in  the  case  of  the  highest  geuus  which  ia 
existence,  and  the  lowest  species  which  is  the  visosas  or  individual 
characteristics  appertaining  to,  inhering  in  the  eternal  substances. 
Genus  and  spocies  therefore  exist  by  combiuatioti  with  substances. 
Without  substance,  there  where  were  no  genus  and  species.  Similarly, 
combination  is  "  the  intimate  connection  iu  the  inseparably  connected 
things  "  ;  e.  y.  of  parts  and  wholes,  of  substances  and  their  attributes,, 
of  action  and  the  sent  of  action,  of  genus  and  soecies  and  substances, 
in  which  they  reside,  and  of  eternal  substances  aud  their  ultimate- 
differences.  Without  substance,  then,  there  were  no  combination. 
Substance,  there-fore,  is  the  fundamental  reality. 

By  analysis,  substance  is  resolved  into  nine  kinds  :  viz.  Earth, 
Water,  Fire,  Air,  Ether,  Time,  Space,  Soul,  and  Mind.  Of  these  Earth, 


Water,  Fire,  and  Air  are,  as  effects,  i.  e.,  wholes  made  up  of  parts,  non- 
eternal..  Their  ultimate  atoms  which  are  without  parts,  are  eternal. 
On  the  other  hand,  Ether,  Time,  Space,  Soul,  and  Mind  are  without 
parts,  and. therefore  oternal.  Ether  is  held  to  be  "nothing-  other  than 
the  cosmic  vacuum  (?)  which  contains  all  objects,  and  gives  room  for 
their  activities".  Time  and  Space  are  complementary  to  Ether.  The 
three  substances  are  in  reality  one  only  (Prasastapada  and  Chandra- 
kanta).  Mind,  again,  is  entirely  material,  and  yet  capable  of  coining 
.into  intimate  relation  with  the  Soul  ;  it  is  as  it  were  a  sort  of  camera 
•obscura  to  the  Soul.  In  another  view,  the  ultimate  atoms  are  subject  to 
change  ;  they  produce  effects;  and  themselves  undergo  changes,  but  do 
not  initiate  changes,  jexcept  in  so  far  as  they  reflect  themselves  in  the 
Mind.  Mind  also  suffers  change  ;  it  modifies  in  the  form  of  everv  ob 
ject  it  comes  in  contact  with  ;  otherwise  it  is  absolutely  inactive.  The 
Soul,  on  the  other  hand,  does  not  suffer  change  of  states.  Tt  is. the 
initiator  of  change  in  everything  else.  Cognition,  pleasure,  pain, 
desire,  aversion,  volition,  merit,  demerit,  and  impressiou  are  its  attri 
butes,  and  not  its  essence.  They  are  determinations  of  Will,  and  prove 
a  state  of  "indetermination  of  Will"  in  which  the  Soul  is  truly  free  and 
eternal,  tt  follows  that  Atoms,  Minds,  and  Souls  are  the  ultimate  unit* 
in  Creation.  The  highest  Soul,  the  Supreme  Person,  is  God. 

Atoms  and  Minds  do  not  exist  for  themselves.  They  exist  for  th« 
Souls,  for  their  bhoga  and  apavarga,  transmigration  and  emancipation. 
In  the  beginning  of  Creation,  activity  is  induced  in  them — they  are  set 
in  motion, — by  Adristam,  the  resultant  energy  abiding  in  the  Souls  aa 
a  consequence  of  their  previous  activities.  It  causes  the  combination 
of  iitoms  to  form  the  body  and  the  world.  "The  sphere  of  transmigra 
tion  is  the  common  result  of  the  individual  adflsta,  and  every  one7* 
bodv  and  other  personal  circumstances  are  the  special  results  of  the  in 
dividual  adrista".  It  has  no  activity  during  the  time  of  the  world'e 
dissolution.  At  the  end  of  the  period  of  dissolution,  it  is  set  free  by 
the  will  of  (rod.  It  then  starts  the  process  of  Creation,  and  maintains 
it  ;  it  is  t!ie  sustaining  energy  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  Crea 
tion.  It  can  be  neutralised, — its  force  can  be  exhausted, — only  by  th» 
action  of  the  Soul  (Vaisesika  Sutras,  V.  ii.  16). 

In  this  view  the  interesting  references  that  are  met  with  here  and 
there  in  the  Vaisesika  Sutras,  to  cosu.ology,  geology,  mineralogy,  bot 
any  and  plant-physiology,  zoology,  physiology,  mechanics,  acoustic*, 
and  other  positive  sciences,  become  explained.  The  doctrine  of  adri 
sta  carries  the  enquiry  further  into  the  field  of  ethics  and  sociology,  on 
the  one  ha  id,  and  lo^io  aid  epistem>lo^y  as  well  a*  psychology  and 
philology,  0:1  the  other  F>>r,  the  Soul  is  at  the  core  of  reality,  that  is, 
th.3  raa.1  which  is  kio.vi'jle  aid  -laudable.  Every  individual  S  ml  is 
the  centre  of  a  separate  world  of  its  own,  which  is  evolved  to  suit  its 
alf's'ji.  T)  ki.i.v  tlia  S  >ul, — so  have  invue4iate  intuitiiu  of  it,  there 
fore,  it  is  iieje-is  iry  t>  k  i-»vv  the  N^ot-Sjul.  "'For  we  do  not  obtain  an 
iutuiti  >  i  from  reility,  that  is,  an  intellectual  sympathy  with  the  most 
iiiti  iiita  part  of  it, — a  ileii  we  have  won  its  confidence  by  a  long  rello- 
w  »lii  j  with,  its  sn  jerti^ial  manifestations.  (Bergson,  An  Introduction 
to  Metaphysics). 

Kviada  accordingly  elab>r;ibes  a  process  of  thinking  consideration 
of  things.  As  Dr.  Deusseu  rightly  observes,  ''India  i  Philosophy  did 


5 

not  start,  as,  for  the  most  part,  the  (Ireecian  did,  from  an  investigation 
free  of  assumptions  into  the  existent,  but  rather  like  modern  philo 
sophy  from  t.ho  critical  analysis  and  testing  of  a  complex  of  know 
ledge  handed  down  (through  the  Veda).  "  Hence  the  Vaisesika  is  also 
called  Manana  s Astra,  treatise  based  on  reasoning,  rational  or  critical 
system.  The  starting  point  of  the  system  is  the  observation  and 
analysis  of  objects,  .with  a  view  to  their  strict  definition  and  a  correct 
appreciation  of  their  place  and  function  in  the  world  of  bhoga  and 
apavarga,  probation  and  perfection,  bondage  and  freedom.  And 
tattva-jnana,  knowledge  of  truth,  is  its  end  and  aim.  To  accomplish 
this  result,  it  evolves  a*  doctrine  of  Scientific  Method,  which,  however, 
is  "  only  a  subsidiary  discipline,  being  comprehended  under  the  wider 
conception  of  Methodology,"  which  proceeds  by  way  of  "  (1)  the  pro 
position  (or  enumeration)  of  the  subject-matter  (Uddesa),  (2)  the 
ascertainment  of  the  essential  characters  or  marks,  by  Perception, 
Inference,  the  Inductive  Methods,  etc.  —resulting  in  definitions  (by 
Jaksana)  or  descriptions  (by  upalaksana)  ;  and  (3)  examination  and 
verification  (pariksa  and  nirnaya)"  (Seal).  In  this  method,  logic  is 
not  pure  reasoning  or  inference  ;  the  reasoning  is  also  proof.  And 
the  Methodology  evolved  by  Kanada  and  Gotama  has  been  carried 
almost  to  perfection  in  the  later  Nyaya,  "which,  inspite  of  its  arid  dia 
lectics,  possesses  a  threefold  significane  in  the  history  of  thought:  (1) 
logical,  in  its  conceptions  of  Avachchhedaka  and  Pratiyogi,  being  an 
attempt  to  introduce  quantification  on  a  connotative  basis,  in  other 
words,to  introduce  quantitative  notions  of  Universal  and  Particular,  in 
both  an  affirmative  and  a  negative  aspect,  into  the  Hindu  theory  of 
Inference  and  Proposition  regarded  connotatively  as  the  establishment 
of  relations  among  attributes  or  marks  ;  (2)  scientific,  in  its  investiga 
tion  of  the  varieties  of  Vyapti  and  TJpadhi  (and  of  Anyathasiddha), 
being  an  elaboration  of  Scientific  Method,  in  the  attempt  to  eliminate 
the  irrelevant  •  and  (3)  ontological  and  epistemological,  in  its  classi 
fication  and  precise  determination  of  the  various  relations  of  Know 
ledge  and  Being,  with  even  greater  rigidity  and  minuteness  than  in 
Hegel's  Logic  of  Being  and  Essence"  (Seal). 

The  criterion  of  truth,  in  the  Vail^sika  Sutras,  is  the  correspon 
dence  of  thought  with  things  and  vice  v-ir-ia  Truth  a:id  reality  are,  in 
this  system,  convertible  terms.  "*  *  *  the  existence  of  the  concept  of  au 
object,  subjective  as  well  as  objective,  is  tlie  lo^isal  reas  vi  for  and  the 
real  consequence  of  the  existence  of  the  object"  (\n).  Existence  per 
vades  the  world  of  reality:  to  be  real,  is  t>>  be  existe  it:  a^id  to  be  exis 
tent  is  t">  bi  k  -lowable  aid  nanjable;  than  is.  there  mist  be  in  it 
"an  immediately  intuitable  ele:n3'it,  which  is  lete-mi  ied  by  the  function 
of  o  ie  or  in  >re  of  our  se  isas.  or  by  in-ier  per^itio'i"  (Si.jwart),  or, 
as  we  sh-m!  I  say,  by  th^  Mni  i;l',  aai  all,  bv  m-»d;tation  a -id  tra  isoaa- 
dental  or  ;>u!-e  perse  >tio-i  (t^ttva-saksatkara).  Hen.ce  the  Vaisesika 
is  called  a  r-aalis:n,  a  id,  — ;t  dualism. 

A  characteristic  d  ><3tri-ie  of  the  Vaifijsika  is  its  Kriya-vada.  This 
is  the  d  >ct.ri  e  which  h  >lds  that  self  is  active,  or  that  self  is  affected 
by  pleti3ui-?  or  desire  et^  ,  i'i  other  wjtvls,  that  it  is  a  kartri  or  an 
age  it,  i  i  tho  course  of  t!ia  eyolution,  or  more  •jorr-jtly,  revolution  of 
its  traasnai^ratory  existence. 


6 

• 

Another  characteristic  doctrine  of  the  \raisesika  is  its  Arambha- 
vada:  the  doctrine,  namely,  that  the  world  as  an  effect,  is  not  a  mere 
appearnace  (vivarta)  of  the  cause,  nor  an  evolution  (pariuama)  of  tho 
cause,  but  is  produced  by  aggregation  of  the  cause  which  is  the  ulti 
mate  atoms.  And  this  leads  to  the  doctrine  of  Alat-karya-vada,  that  is, 
that  an  effect  has  only  a  temporary  existence,  and  that,  before  its  pro 
duction,  and,  after  its  destruction,  it  is  non-existent. 

Before  we  close  this  short  notice  of  the  scope  and  character  <»C  the 
Vaisesika  Philosophy,  it  is  our  pleasant  duty  to  acknowledge  our 
obligations  to  the  distinguished  authors  cited  above.  Our  special 
thanks  are  due  to  Dr.  Sea]  and  1'rofessor  Ui  whom  \ve  have  freely 
quoted. 

Translator. 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 

(N.  B.  Asterisks  indicate  the  Aphorisms  of  Kanada  ) 

BOOK  I. 
Of  the  Predicables. 

CHAPTER  I. 
Of  Substance,  Attribute,   and  Action. 

SECTION  A. 
Of  the  Problem  of  Evil. 

Page- 
Human  suffering  prompts  an  enquiry  as  to  the  means    of  its 

removal  . 

Realisation  of  the  Self  alone  can  end  all  suffering 
Kanada's  view  is  that  the  Self  can  be   realised    by  means  of 
the  Not-Self  by  a  person    who    does  not  covet  the  things 
of  die  world  ~ 

Sruti  and  Siuriti  in  support    of  the  above  view 

SECTION  B. 

Of  the  Scope  and  Method  of  Kanada. 

The  scheme  of  the  Aphorisms  of  Kanada  o 

Kanada's     Methodology  :     Enumeration,     Definition       and 

Demonstration  ft 

SECTION  c. 
Of  Dharma. 

'  Dharma  is  to  be  explained. —  1  ft 

Dharma  (Contemplation    of    Truth)    purifies   the    mind    and 

creates  thirst  after  knowledge 
•'  Dharma  brings  forth  Knowledge  of  Truth   and  the  Supreme 

Good. — 2 
Vrittikara's  explanation  of  the  Aphorism  a 

SECTION  D. 
Of  the.   Veda. 
The  Veda  is  the  Word  of  God,  or  is  an  exposition  of  Dharma, 

and  hence  is  authoritative. — 3  fl 

Arguments  against  the  authority  of  the  Veda  refuted  7 

SECTION  E. 

Of  the  Supreme  Good. 
he  Supreme  Good  results  from  the  knowledge  of  the    truth 

<   )out  the  fc>ix  Predicables. — 4  g 

The  Supreme  Good  consists  in  the  final  cessation  of  Pain  ' 
1  cessation     of    pain     consists  in  the     antecedent    non- 
ustence  of  pain  brought  about  by  the  neutralisation  of 
tne  cause  of  pain  n 

How  «  antecedent  non-existence-  is  an  object  of  volition  \ 

of      aineme  ^    110t    Uie     "  abBolut«  "oil-existence" 

Non-e*i,,t«n«.  «*  «.;„  distinguished  from  the  state  of  swoon  & 

11 


11 

Neither  is  it  the    laya  or  dissolution  of    the  fudividual    Self 

into  the  Universal  Self 

Nor,  the  removal  of  the  veil  of  Nescience  from  the  Self 
Nor,  the  unimpeded  flow  of  the  stream  of  consciousness      ...  11 

SECTION  F. 

Of  the  Categories. 

Sixfold  division  of  nameable  things  defended  ...  12 

Mere  knowledge  distinguished  from  the    realisation    of    the 

truth 

Upaskara  criticised  by  the  author  of  Vivriti  ...  13 

tl  Non-existence  "  is  the  seventh  Predicable,    not    denied  by 

Kanada  ... 

Nyaya,  Vaisesika,  aud  Sarnkhya  views  of  the  Supremo  Good 

are  the  same  ... 

A  section    of    the    Nyaya    thinkers    hold    that  the  Supreme 

Good  consists  in  the  permanent  cessation  of  de-merit  only 
The  division    of    the    Predicables    defended     from     another 

point  of  view  by  Chandrakanta  ...  15 

Why  the  system  of  Kanfida  is  called   Vaisesika  ...  15 

In  reality,    there    are    only    three     Predicables,    Substance, 

Attribute,  and   Action  ...  Itt 

SECTION*  G. 

Of  the  Enumeration  of  Substance,  Attribute  and  Action. 

*  Earth,    Waters,    Fire,  Air,    Ether,    Time,    Space,   Self,   and 

Mind  are  the  nine  Substances. — 5  ...  17 

"  Self  "  includes  Grod  ;  Metals  are  transformation    of  Tcja* 

(Fire)  ...  17 

Darkness  is  not  a  separate  Substance,  but  a  non-entity     ...  17 

Chandrakanta  thinks  that  Time  and    Space  are  included  in 

Akasa   (Ether)  ...  J8 

Attributes  reside    in  Substances,    are    manifested    by   Sub 
stances,  and  themselves  manifest  Substances  ...  18 

*  Attributes  are  Colour,  etc. — 6  ...  18 
A    reflection    on    the    Samkhya    theory    of    Buddhi  (Cruder- 
standing)                                                                                            ...  19 

Pleasure  and  Pain  do  not  differ  in  kind  ...  1& 

*  Actions  are  Throwing  Upwards,  etc. — 7  ...  19 
Action  analysed                                                                                     ...            20 

SECTION  H. 

Of  their  Resemblances  and  Differences. 

•*  Resemblances  of  Substance,  Attribute,  and  Action  stated. — 8  21 

Ultimate  stems  are  not  anityam  or  perishable  ...  22 

*  Resemablance  of  Substance  and  Attribute  stated. — 9,  10    ...  22 

*  Actions  do  not  originate  Actions. — 11  ...  23 
Difference     of     Substance     from      Attribute     and      Action 

stated  ...  24 

*  Substance  is  not  destroyed    by    its  own  effect   or  by  its  own 

cause. — 12  ...  24 

*  Attributes  are  destroyed  i.n  both  ways. — 13  ...  24 

*  Action  is  destroyed  by  its  own   effect. — 14  ...          .  24 

*  A  Substance  is  that  which  possesses  Action  and    Attribute, 

and  operates  as  a  material  cause. — 15  ...  25 


Ill 

In  what  sense  the  Self  which  is    void  of    action,    is    a  Subs 
tance  •  ••  25 

*  An  Attribute  is  that  which    inheres  in    Substance,  does  not 

possess    Attribute,    and    is  not  an  independent  cause  of 
Conjunction  and  Disjunction. — 10  ...  2ft 

*  An   Action  is  that  which  inheres  in  one  Substance  only,  and 

is  an    independent  cause    of   Conjunctions  and  Disjunc 
tions.— 17  ...  2d 

*  Substance,    Attribute,    and    Action    co-exist  in  one  and  Ihe 

same  Substance. — 18  ...  27 

*  Thev    have    the  same    Attribute    as    their  non-material    or 

efficient  cause. — 19  ...  28 

*  Conjunction,  Disjunction,  and  Impetus  are  the    co-effects  of 

Action.— 20  ...  28 

*  Action    is    not     an    immediate    cause    in    the  production  of 

Substance— 21,22  ...  29 

*  A  single  Substance    may  be  the  joint  effect    of    many    Subs 

tances  ;  but  not  so    Action. — 23,  24  ...  30 

*  Certain   Attributes  are  originated  by  more  than    one    Subs 

tance.— 25  ...  80 

*  A  single  Action    does    not  relate  to  two  or  more  Substances 

at  the  same  time. — 26  ...  31 

*  Resemblance    of    Substance,    Attribute,  and  Action   further 

stated.— 27,  28,  29  ...  32 

Twofold  operation  of  efficient  causes  explained  ...  32 

*  Actions  produce  Conjunctions  and  Disjunctions. — 30  ... 

*  Causality  of  Action  further  upheld. — -31  ...  33 

CHPTER  II. 
Of  Genus  and  Species. 

SECTION  A. 
Of  the  Relation  of  Cause  and  Effect. 

*  Non-existence  of    effect    follows    from   the    non-existence  of 

cause. — 32  ...  35 

Importance  of  the  principle  of  causality  explained  ...  35 

The  Samkhya  theory  of  Causation    considered  ...  35 

The  Yaisesika  doctrine  of  Causality  maintained  ...  36 

*  But  non-existence    of    cause    does    not  follow  from  the  non- 

existence  of  the  effect.— 33  ...  37 

The  bearing  of  the  doctrine  of  Causality  on    the  problem  of 

the  Supreme  Good  explained  ...  37 

SECTION  B. 
Of  Genus  and  /Species. 

*  Geaus  and  Species  are    relative    terms  distinguished  by  the 

Understanding. — 34  ...  38 

Objections  to  the  doctrine  of  Jati  or  Universals  stated       ...  38 

The  objections  answered   ...  ...  39 

The  Mimamsa  doctrine  of  Jati  considered  ...  40 

Marks  which  indicate  that  a  thing  is  not  a  Genus,  stated 

and  explained  ...  40 

*  Existence  is  pure  Genus,  as  it  recurs  everywhere. — 35          ...  41 

*  The  characteristics    of    Substance,    Attribute,    and    Action 

are  both  Genera  and  Species. — 36  ...  41 


IV 

Proof  of  the  existence  of  Genera  and  Specieg  stated  ...  12 

*  The  Predicable  Viiesa  is  pure  Species,  as  it  is    the  ultimate 

principle  of  differenciation. — 37  ...  1-3 

*  Existence  causes  the  belief  that  Substa  ice,    Attribute,    and 

Action  are  existent. — 38  ...  13 

*  It  is  a    different     object     from     Substance,     Attribute,    and 

Action. — 39 

*  It  exists  in  Attributes  and  Actions. — 40  ...  -14 

*  It  does  not  comprehend    the    characteristics    of    Subsuince, 

Attribute,      and      Action,     as     alternately     Genus      and 
Species- — 41  ...  15 

*  Substance-ness  is  a  Genus. — 42  ...  45 

*  Substance-ness  is  different  from  Substances. — 43  ...  15 

*  Attribute-ness  is  a  Genus. — 44  ...  !•<; 

*  Attribute-ness  is  different    from    Substance,    Attribute,  and 

Action. — 45  ...  JO 

*  Action-ness  is  a  Genus. — 46  ...  !»> 

*  Action-ness  is    different    from     Substance,     Attribute,     and 

Action. — 41  ...  17 

~x~  Existence  is  one  and  universal. — 48  ...  17 

BOOK  II. 

Of  the  Substances. 
CHAPTER  I. 

Of  Earth,  Waters,  Fire,  Air,  and  hither. 

SECTION  A. 
Of  the  Description  of  the  Five  Jjhiltas. 

*  Earth  possesses  Colour,  Taste,  Smell,  and  Touch — 49  ...  1-8 

*  Waters  possess  Colour,  Taste,  and  Touch,   and  are  fluid  and 

viscid. — 50  ...  51 

*  Fire  possesses  Colour  and  Touch. — 51  ...  53. 
Fourfold  Tejas  (Fire)  explained  ...  5:j 

*  Air  possesses  Touch. — 52  ...  54 

*  Cotour,  Taste,  fcmell,  and  Touch    do  not    exist  in  Ether. — 53  54 
Ndf' in  Space  and  Time  ...  54 

*  The' fluid    state    of    Earth-substances  and     Fire-substances 

"(metals)  is  caused  by  the  action  of  heat,  and  therefore 
artificial,  and  not  natural,  as  it  is  in  the  case  of 
Waters. — 54,55  ...  55 

Gold,  etc.  are  tansformations  of  Fire  (Tejas  ...  5^5 

SECTION  B. 
Of  the  Inference  of  Air. 

*  The  use  of  Inference  explained. — 56  ...  5O' 

*  Touch  is  a  mark  of  the  inference  of  Air. — 57  ...  57 
Air  is  not  an  object  of  sense-perception   Conditions  of  Per 
ception  discussed                                                                            ...  59 

*  The  Touch  which  infers  Air,  is  Touch    without  Colour.— 58  tfO 

*  Air  is  a  separate  Substance. — 59  ...  60 

*  It  possesses  Action  and  Attribute. — 60  ...  (50 
Proof  of  Parama  Anu  or  Ultimate  Atom   staled  ...  (H 

*  Air  is   eternal. — 61  ...  6' 

*  A;r  is  manifold. —62  ...  62 

*  Visible  principle  of  inference  of  Air  is  not   known.— 63     ...  62 


*  Mode  of  iufereice  of  Air  stated. — 64  ...            63 

*  The  name,  Air,  is  derived  from  the  Veda, — 65  ...           64 

SEBTION  c. 
Of  Existence  of  Gt-od. 

*  Language    a'id    Creation    are    marks    of    the  inference    of 

superior  Beings. — 66  ...            64 

*  Because    they     presuppose    knowledge    by    Perception. — 67  65 

SECTION  D. 
Of  Inference  of  Ether. 

*  The  Samkhya  view    stated  :    Actions,    e.  j/.,    egress,  ingress, 

etc.  are  marks  of  Ether. — 68  ...  66 

*  And  criticised  :  Action  appears  in  corporal  Substances  only, 

and  also  not  in  more  than  one  at  a  time. — 69  ...  66 

*  Ether,    being     a      Substance,     cannot     be    a     non-material 

cause. — 70  ...  67 

~*  Neither     can      it      be    the    occasional     (nimitta)     cause  of 

Action. — -71  •••  67 

*  An  effect  derives  its  attribute  from  its  cause. — 72  ...  68 

*  Sound  is  not  an  attribute  of  tangible  Substances. — 73  ...  68 

*  Nor  of  Soul,  nor  of    Mind  —74  ...  69 

*  Therefore,  it  is  the  mark  of  Eth^r. — 75  ...  69 
Time  and  Space  are  really  identical   with  Ether,  ...  70 

*  Ether  is  a  Substance  and  is  eternal,  like    Air. — 76  ...  70 

*  It  is  one,  like  Existence. — 77  ...  70 

*  There  is  nothing  to  infer  a  plurality  of  Ether. — 78  ...  70 

*  "  Separateness  of  one  "   (individuality)  belongs  to  Ether. 79  71 
Summary  of  the  chapter  ...  71 

CHAPTER  II. 

Of  the  Five  Bhutas,  Time,  and  Space. 

SECTION   A. 
Of  Essential  and  Accidental  Attributes. 

*  Smell    perceived    in    a    piece    of  cloth  is  due  to  the  contact 

of  Hower. —80  ...  73 

Smell,  etc.  proceeding  from  the  material  cause  of  subs 
tance,  are  essential  or  natural  ;  otherwise,  they  are 
accidental  or  conditional 

*  Smell  is  natural  to  Earth. — 81 

*  Similarly  hotness  is  natural  or  accidental. — 82 

*  Hotness  is  natural  to  Fire. — 83' 

*  Coldness  is  natural  to  Waters. — 84 

Touch  which    is    neither    hot    nor    cold,   nor    is    due  to  the 

action  of  heat,  is  natural  to  Air  75 

SCETION    B. 

Of  the  Characteristics  of  Time. 

*  "Now,"  "  Then,"  "Simultaneous,""  Slow,"  "  Quick,"— such 

are  the  marks  of  Time. — 85                                                       «••  75 

Time  is    the    principle    of  Change  ;  Change    measures  Time  76 

*  Like  Air,  Time  is  a  Substance,  and  is  eternal. — 86 

*  Like  Existence,  Time'is  one. — 87                                                  •••  77 

*  Time  is  the  efficient  cause  of  all  that  is  produced. — 88         ...  78 


VI 


SCETICN    C. 

Of  the  Characteristics  of  Space. 

*  "  This,  from  this  "—such  is  the  mark  of   Space. — 80  ...  7H 
Distance  in  place  cannot  be  explained  by  Time                     ...            79 
Time  relations  cannot  be    altered  ;  Space    relations    can    be 

altered  •••  ~'«> 

*  Like  Air,  Space  is  a  Substance,  and  is  eternal.— 90  ...  80 

*  Like  Existence,  Space  is  one. — 91  80 
Chandrakanta    thinks,    Ether,     Time,    and    Space    are  but 

different  forms  of  a  single  Substance  ...  80 

*  Its  manifoldness  is  due  to  the  variety  of  its  effects. — 92     ...  81 

*  The  conception     of    the    East,     South,     West,     and    North 

explainsd.— 93,  94  ...  8lj 

*  Similarly,  the  intermediate  directions. — 95  ...  H2 

SECTION  D. 
Of  Doubt. 

*  Doubt  arises  from  the  perception    of    the    general    property, 

non-perception  of  the    differentia,    and    the    recollection 

of  the  alternatives. — 96 

Doubt  is  not  A-Prama  or  Uncertain  Knowledge 
Doubt    is    neither    threefold  nor    fivefold,    as    some   Nyaya 

teachers  think 
Doubt  is  not  "Wonder"  or  curiosity  ;    nor    is    it    knowledge 

which  does  not  produce  an    impression  (Samskara)          ...  SI 

Doubt  is  (i)  internal  ,  or  (ii)  external  :  (a)  in  respect    of    an 

object  in  view,  or  (b)  in  respect    of    an  object    concealed 

from  view  84 

*  The    property    seen    may    have    been    observed    in    several 

objects  before. — 97  ...  S4 

*  Or  an  object  may  be  seen  in  a  different    form    from    that    in 

which  is  was  seen  before. — 98  84 

*  Doubt  arises  from  science  anb  nescience  also. — 99  ...  85- 
Nyaya  Sutra,  I-i-22,  considered                                                       ...  85-; 

SECTION  E 
Of  Sound. 

*  Sound  is  the  object  of  perception  by  the  ear. — 100  ...  86- 
The  doctrine  of  Sphota  is  refuted  by  Convention                     ...            86- 

'  Sound  is  an    object    apart    from    all    other    objects  :    hence 

Doubt  arises  in  respect  of  it. — 101  ...  87 

Sound  is  not  a  Substance  nor  an   Action. — 102,103  ...  87 

*  Sound  is  transient,  not  eternal. — 104,  105  ...  881 

*  Sound  differs  in  property  from  that  which  is  eternal. — IOC  ...  S() 

*  Sound  is  non -eternal,  because  it  is  an  effect. — 107,  108        ...  HO 

*  Defect     in      the     doctrine     of     the     eternality     of    Sound 

stated  — 109  ...  90 

*  Sound  is  produced  from  Conjunction,  Disjunction,    and  also 

from  another   Sound. — 110  ...  1)1 

*  Sound  is  non-eternal,  also  because    of  its    mark,    viz.    to    be 

cognisable  by  the  ear. — 111  ...  91 

*  Arguments  in  favour  of  the  eternality  of   Sound    stated  and 

refuted.— 112-116  ...      91-941 


Vll 


Two  theories  of  the  production  of  Sound  :  (a)  Vichitarnga- 
nyaya  (successive  production  of  single  sounds)  and  (6) 
Itadamba-golaka-nyaya  (simultaneous  production  of 
multiple  sounds)  •••  94 

BOOK  III. 

Of  Soul  and  Mind. 

CHAPTER  I. 
Of  the  Marks  of  Inference. 

SECTION  A. 
Of  Enquiry  Respecting  Soul. 

*  The  objects  of  the  Senses  are  perceived. — 117  ...  96 

*  Their  perception  is  the  mark  of    the    existence    of  an  object 

different  from  them. — 118  ...  96 

*  The  Body  or  the  Senses  are  not  the  seat  of  perception. — llg,  97 

*  Because  there  is  no  consciousness  in  their  causes. — 120       ...  97 

*  For  consciousness  does  not    appear  in  the  other  products  of 

those  causes. — 121  ...  98 

*  And  because  consciousness  is  not  known  to    exist    in    those 

causes. — 122  •««  98 

Recollection  of  previous  experience  in  an  amputated  part 
of  the  body,  the  Law  of  Karma,  recollection  of  infancy 
in  youth,  instinctive  acts,  etc.  are  so  many  more  objec 
tions  to  a  physiological  theory  of  consciousness  ...  98,99 

SECTION  B. 
Of  Fallacies  of  Inference, 

*  An  identical  mark  cannot  be  a  means  of  inference. — 123    ... 

*  Any  one  thing  cannot  be  a  mark  of    any   other    thing. — 124          100 

SECTION  c. 
Of  Marks  of  Inference. 

*  The  Conjunct,  the  Inherent,  the    Co-inherent,    and  the  Con 

tradictory.— 125  •  ••          100 

*  One  effect,  of  another  effect. — 126 

•*  The  non-existent,  of  the  existent. — 127 

*  The  past,  of  the  non-past. — 128 

•*  The  past,  of  the  past. — 129  102 

*  For  a  mark  operates  on  the    recollection    of  the  "  universal 

relation."— 130  •••          102 

"  Universal  relation  "  discussed  ...          107 

SECTION  D. 
Of  Enumeration  of  Fallacies. 

*  The  unproved,  the    non-existent,    and  the    dubious  are  false 

marks— 131  ••• 

*  E-  g-j  because  it  has  horns,  therefore  it  is  a  horse. — 132       ...          L07 

*  A  multifarious    is    also    a    false    mark  :  e.  g.    because  it  has 

horns,  therefore  it  is  a  cow. — 133 
Various  kinds  of  "  unproved  "  mark  indicated 
Threefold  division  of  true  marks  described 

True  and  false  marks  discussed.  109 

Other  examples  of  false  mark  described  ««• 

False  marks  are  of  three  kinds,  and  not    five,  as  maintained 

in  the  Nyaya 


Vlll 


SECTION  E. 
Of  Marks  of  Inference  of  Soul. 

*  Cognition  produced  from  the  contact  of  the  Soul,  the  Sense, 

and  the  Object,  is  a  true  mark. — 134  ...  Ill 

The  Bauddha  theory  cf  Recognition  and  Recollection 

criticised  m 

A  possible  attack  on  the  Samkhya  theory  of  Buddhi  ...  112 

*  Activity  and    inactivity    observed    in    one's    own    soul,  are 

marks  of  inference  of  other   souls. — 135  ...          113 

CHAPTER  II. 
Of  the  Inference  of  Soul  and  Mind. 

SECTION  A. 
Of  the  Mind. 

The  appearance  and  non-appearance  of  knowledge  on  the 
contact  of  the  Soul  with  the  Senses  and  the  Objects,  are 
marks  of  the  existence  of  the  Mind. — 136  J 14 

Mind  is  not  universal,  but   atomic  ]14 

Mind  is  a  Substance,  and  is  eternal. 137 

*  Mind  is  one  — 138  Hg 
The  theory  that  there  are  as  many  minds  as  there  are  senses 

in  the  organism,  and  that    mind    is    a    whole    made  ui>  of 
parts,  refuted  Ug 

SECTION  B. 
Of  the  Said. 

The  marks  of  the  inference  of  the  Soul  are  many. —139  117 

The  body  is  not  the  seat  of  consciousness  Hg 

The  Soul  is  a  Substance,  and  is  eternal. — 140 
The  doctrine  that  the    Soul    is  not    known  by  inference,  but 

by  Revelation,  stated. — 141-143  120 

>  But  the  very  word  "I"  infers  the  Soul,  so   that   the    Soul   'is 

known  by  inference  as  well  as  from  Revelation.— -144  121 

ine  Soul  is  not  imperceptible  to  the  Mind  122 

'   But  "  Devadatta  »  (a  person)  is  known  by  perception  :  what 

is  the  use  of  inference  ? 145  j22 

*•  Inference  strengthens  the  intuition. — 146  123 

"  Devadatta  goes  "  —is  a  metaphor. — 147 
The  metaphor    raises    a    doubt:     In  «  I  am    fair  "  "  I  "  ma'v 

refer  to  the  body  or  to  the  Soul. 148  124 

The    intuition  of  «  I  "  arises    in    respect    of    one's  own  Soul 

only,    and    not    of    others' :  hence    ,t    denotes    the     Soul 

primarily.— 149  ,O4 

The    doctrine    that    the    intuition     of  "  I  "  js    primarily    i'n 

respect  of  the  body,  raises  the  same  doubt — 150-151  12« 

Were  consciousness  an    attribute    of    the    body,    one    would 

perceive  the  thoughts  of  another,  and  vice  versa.— 152  12(5 

The  Soul  is  not  proved  by  Revel;  tion  alone,  as    it  is  proved 

by  its  characteristic    mark    of    the  intuition    in  the  form 

or      1     . — 153  -J27 

The  Vedanta  doctrine  criticised  by  Jayanarayana  iQfi 

How  the  boul  is  distinguished  as  Jiva  or  isvara'  129 


SECTION  c. 
Of  Plurality  of  Souls- 

*  Soul  is  one,  because  there  is  no  difference  in  the  productio 

of  pleasure,  pain,    and  knowledge. — 154 

*  Plurality  of  Souls  is  proved  by  circumstances  — U  ** 

*  The  Veda  also  supports  this  view. — 156 

BOOK  IV. 

Of  the  Origin  of  Bodies. 

CHAPTER  T. 

Of  Atoms. 

SECTION  A. 

Of  the  Eternal. 

*  The  eternal  is  that  which  is  existent,  and  uncaused.— 157... 

SECTION  B. 
Of  Existence  of  Ultimate  Atoms. 

*  The  effect  is    the    mark    of    the    existence    of    the  Ultimate 

Atom. — 158  1  _ 

*  The  Ultimate  Atoms  possess  Colour,  etc.  — 159  J»* 

*  The  Ulimate  Atom  is  eternal.— 160 

Objections  to  the  eternality  of  the  Ultimate  Atom  stated  ... 

*  It  is  an  error  to    suppose    that    the    Ultimate  Atom    is    not 

eternal.— 161 

SECTION  c. 

Of  Condition  of  Perception. 

*  Perception  takea  place  from  magnitude  due  to  possession  of 

component  parts,  and  from   colour. — 162 

*  Air  is  not  perceived  by  the  Senses,  because  it  has  not  colour 

developed  in  it— 163  137 

SECTION  D. 
Of  Perception  of  Attributes. 

*  Perception  of  Colour,  Taste,  Smell,   and  Touch  takes    place 

from  their  special  characteristics,  and  from  their  inhere- 
ing  in  compound  bodies. — 164,165  ...  188, 139 

Conditions  of  their  perception  are  their  special  charac 
teristics,  absence  of  a  more  powerful  like  attribute, 
their  intensity,  and  inherence  in  compound  bodies 

*  Gravitv  is  not  perceptible. — 166 

Gravity  is  perceptible  to    Touch,  says    Vallabhacharya 

SECTION  E. 
Of  Hi-sensual  Perception. 

*  Numbers,  Magnitudes,  Separateness,  Conjunction,  Disjunc 

tion,  Priority,  Posteriority,  and  Action  are  perceptible 
to  the  eve  in  bodies  possessing  Colour,  and  not  else 
where.— 167,  168  —  141,142 

SECTION  F. 
Of  Omni-sennual  Perception. 

*  The  classes,    Attribute-ness  and    Existence,  are  perceptible 

to  all  the   Senses.— 169 

CHAPTER  II. 

Of  Tangible  Atomic  Products. 


SECTION  A. 
Of  Threefold  Product. 

*  Atoms  produce  Earth,  etc.  in  three    forms,  vixt  Body,  Sense, 

and  Object. — 170  ...          143 

SECTION  B. 
Of  Body. 

*  The  Body  is  not  composed  of  the  five    Bhutas  ;  neither    is  it 

a  compound  of  three  Bhutas. 171,  172  ...          144 

*  The  influence  of  the  other  Bhutas  is  not  denied. — 173         ...          145 

SECTION  c. 
Of  Twofold  Body. 

*  Body  is   twofold  :  sexually     and   a-sexually-produced 174          145 

The  sexual  body  is  either  womb-born  or  is  egg-born  ...          146 

Plants  are  living  bodies  ...          [4g 

*  A-sexual  bodies  are  produced  by  Ultimate  Atoms    not    con 

fined  in  direction  and  place 175  ...  14(5 

They  exist  in  the  worlds  of  Varuna,  etc.  ...          148 

*  Ultimate  Atoms  are  moved  by  a  particular  Dkarma  towards 

the    production    of    the     a-sexual    bodies     of    gods     and 
sages. — 176  ...          147 

*  Thero  is  record  of  the  existence  of  such  bodies 177  ...          147 

*  Brahma,  the  first-born  must  have  been  produced  a-sexuallv. 

-178  ...          U8 

*  A-sexual  bodies  do  exist;as  is    seen  in  the  Veda 179,  180...         148 

Aqueous,  igneous,  and  aerial  bodies  cannot  but  be  a-sexually 

produced.  ...          149 

Constitution  of  the  organs  of  Sense  described.  ...          149 

Manifestations  of  Earth,  Waters,  Fire,  and  Air  described...         149 

BOOK  V. 

Of  Investigation  of  Action. 

CHAPTER  I. 
Of  Voluntary  Action. 

SECTION  A. 
Of  Upward  Movement. 

*  The  hand  moves  up  in  the  presence,  and  by  the  volition,    of 

the  Soul.— 181  ...  151 

Action  analysed  ...  15] 

*  With  the  hand,  the  pestle  goes  up. — 182  ...  151 

*  Volition  is  the  cause  neither  of  the  rebounding  of  the  pestle 

nor  of  the  going  up  of  the  hand  with  it. — 183-186  ...  152,168 

SECTION  B. 
Of  Downward  Movement. 

*  In    the    absence    of     an    impediment,     a     body     falls     from 

gravity. — 187  ...          154 

*  It  does  not  go    upward    nor    sideward,   because    there  is  no 

impulse  towards  those  directions. — 188  ...          154 

*  A  particular  impulse  is  given  by  a  particular  volition — 189          155 

*  Range  of  motion  depends  upon  the  impulse. — 190  ...          155 

SECTION  c. 

Of  Cause  of  Merit  and  Demerit. 
'•    Like  the    reaction    of    the    hand,    the  playful  movements  o-f 

limbs  by  an  infant  are  non-moral. — 191  ...          155 

*  So  is  the  bursting  of  bodies  caused  by  burning. — 192          ...          156 


XI 

*  Slodp-walking  is  non-volitional. — 193  ... 

SECTION  D. 
Of  Indifferent  Movement 

*  (Trass  is  moved  by  Air. — Ig4  ...          157 

SECTION  E. 
Of  Movement  caused  by  Adristam. 

*  Adristam    causes    the  jewel    to    move  towards  the  thief,  and 

also  the  attraction  of  iron,  grass,  etc.  by  magnetic  and 
electric  bodies, — 195  ...  157 

SECTION  F 
Of  Nature  of  Motion. 

*  Motion  is  not  one  and  continuous,  but  consists  of  a  series  of 

discreet  movements. — 196  ...          15& 

*  Movement  springs    from    impulse    which    produces    impetus 

which  keeps  up  a  succession  of  movements  from  point  to 
point— 197  ...  159 

A  single  impetus  runs  through  the  whole  series  of  move 
ments  ...  159 

The  Nyfiya  maintains  the  theory  of  a  series  of  impetus  as 

well  ...  159- 

*  Gravity  destroys  the  impetus,  and  the  body  falls. — 198       ...          160- 

CHAPTER  II. 
Of  Non-volitional    Action. 

SECTION  A. 
Of  Action  in  Earth. 

*  '  Impulse,'  '  Impact,'  and  conjunction    with  a  moving  body, 

are    causes  of  action  in  terrene  substances. — 199  ...          161 

*  Earthquake* etc.  which  affect  birth,  and   bhoga,    are    caused 

by  adristam  (destiny). — 200  ...          161 

SECTION  B 
Of  Action  in  Water. 

*  Rain  is  caused  by  the  gravity  of  water  particles  disengaged 

from  the  cloud. — 201  ...          162 

*  Water     flows    in     a     stream    or      current     on     account     of 

fluidity.— 202  ...         162 

*  Sun  and  air  cause  the  evaporation  of  water. — 203,204          ...  162,163 

*  Circulation  of  water  in  trees  is  caused  by  adristam — 205  ...          163 
Water  is    transformed    as    snow,    hail,  etc.  by  the  actiou    of 

heat.— 206-209  ...164,165 

SECTION,  c. 
Of  Action  in  Fire,  and  Air. 

*  Conflagration,    volcanic    eruption,    tempest,  meteor,  etc.  are 

caused  by  adristam. — 210  ... 

''  Adristam  caused  the  movement  of  fire,  air,    atoms,  and  mind 

at  the  time  of  Creation. — 211  ... 

SECTION  D. 
Of  Action  in  Mind. 
(i)  Caused  by  Volition  Soul. 

Volition  of  the  Soul  causes  movement  of  the  mind. 119  ..,          266 

Function  of  the  nervous  process  explained  167 

Pleasure  and  pain,  cognition,  volition,  etc.  are  caused  by 
the  conjunction  of  the  soul  with  the  object  through  the 
mind  and  the  senses. — 213 


XI) 

*  No  change  can  be  produced  in  the  mind  when    it    abides    in 

the  soul,  which  is  the  state  of  Yoga. — 214  ...         167 

SECTION  E. 

Of  Action  in  Mind,  etc. 
(ii)  Caused  by  Adyistam. 

*  The  ingoing    and    outgoing    of    life    and    mind  at  birth  and 

death,  metabolic,  physiological  and  other  vital  processes 

are  caused  by  adristam. — 215  ...  169 

*  Emancipation  takes  place  in  the  absence  of  adristam.-" 216  170 
How  Yoga  destroys  adyistam  is  described                                 ...  170 

SECTION  F. 
Of  Action  in  Shadows, 

*  Darkness  is  a  non-entity. — 217,218  ...          171 

SECTION  G. 
Of  Absence  of  Action. 

*  Space,  Time,  Ether,  Soul,  Action,  Attribute,  Genus,  Species, 

Combination  are  void  of  action,  as  they   are    incorporeal 

or  imponderable.— 219-224  ...  172-174 

BOOK  VI. 

Of  the  Investigation  of  Dharma  and   A-Dharma. 
CHAPTER  I. 

Of  Vedic  Duties. 

SECTION  A. 
Of  Source  of  the  Authority  of  the  Veda. 

*  The  Veda  is  a  statement  of  facts  by  a  person  who  has  previ 

ously  known  those  facts. — 225 
It  is  the  work  of  an  Absolute  Person 
The  Mlmdmsd  doctrine  that  Word  is  eternal,  is  refuted 

*  Allotment  of  names  in  the  Brdhmana  portion  of  the  Veda  is 

a     mark     of    the     previous     knowledge     of     the  things 

named. — 226  ...          175 
"*  Injunctions  on  gift  and  on  acceptance  of  gift    are  also  such 

marks.— 227,228  ...         176 

SECTION  B. 
Of  the  Reaper  of  Consequences. 

*  Result  of  Act  accrues  to  the  performer  enly. — 229  ...          177 
Exceptions  to  the  rule  considered  ...          177 
The  Vrittikdra  does  not  admit  any  exception,  ...          I7g 

SECTION  c. 
Of  Dharma  and  A-dharmas  from  Prescribed  and  Prohibited  Acts. 

*  Entertainment  of  impure  Brahmanas  at  a    &rdddha  does  not 

produce  Dharraa. — 230  ...  179 

*  <  Impurity  '  consists  in  killing. — 231  ...  179 

*  Association  with  the  impure  is  sinful. — 232  ...  779 

*  Entertainment    of    a    pure    Brahman  a   at   a  Srdddha  is  not 

sinful— 233  ...          J80 

*  Puiity,  and  not  status,  should  be  the  criterion.— 234,235     ...          J80 

SECTION  D. 
Of  Certain  Exceptions. 

*  Stealing,    killing,    and    suicide    are    not    sinful    in    certain 

circumstances. — 236-240  .  181-183 


Zlll 

CHAPTER  II. 
Of  the  Production  of  Dharma  and  A-dharma. 

SECTION  A. 

Of  the  Supreme  Good. 
"*   Acts  of  which  the  purpose    is    not    of    this    world,    produce 

'  Exaltation  '—241  ...         184 

Proof  of  Adfistam  is  stated  ...          184 

*  Acts  of  which'  the  objects  are  not  '  visible  '  stated. — 242    ...          181 

SECTION  B. 
Of  Purity. 

•*   Parity     is      purity      of      heart  ;  impurity  is    impurity     of 

heart.— 243,244  ...  185,186 

*  What  objects  are  pure,  stated. — 245  ...         186 

*  Impure  objects  stated.— 246,247  ...  187-188 

SECTION  c. 
Of  Self-restraint. 
~+   Purity    must    be    coupled    with    self-restraint    in    order    to 

produce  (  Exaltation.'— 248,249  ...         188 

SECTION  D. 
Of  Causes  of  i  Faults.' 

*  Desire  and    Aversion    are    caused  by  pleasure  and  pain,  by 

habit,   by    adristam,    and    also    by    racial  distinction. — 
250-253  ...  189,190 

SECTION  E. 

Of  Effects  of  <  Faults.' 
"*•  Desire  and  aversion    cause    activity    towards    dharma   and 

a-dharma. — 254  ...          191 

Activity  of  mind,  speech,  and  body   described  ...          191 

SECTION  P. 

Effects  of  Dharma  and  A-dharma. 
-*  Birth  and  death  are  the    results    of    dharma    and    a-dharma 

255  ...         191 

SECTION  G. 

Of  the  Nature  of  Release. 

*  Release  is  a  state  of  permanent    impossibility  of' pain. — 256         192 
Hew  Release  is  attained,  is  described  ...         Ipfc 

BOOK  VII. 

Of  the  Examination  of  Attributes  and  of  Combination  . 

CHAPTER  I. 

Of  Colour,  Taste,  Smell,  and  Touch,  and  Magnitude. 
SECTION  A. 

Of  Non-eternal  Attributes. 

*  Aphorism  I.  i.  6  recalled— 257  ...         193 

*  Colour,  etc,    of    Earth,  etc.    are    non-eternal,    because  their 

subtrata  are  non-eternal. — 258  ...          193 

SECTION  B. 
Of  Eternal  Attributes. 

*  Colour,  etc.    of    the  ultimate  atoms  of    Water,  Fire,  and  Air 

are  eternal.— 259,260  ...          194 

Vrittikdra's  reading  of  Aphorism  250  explained  ...          194 

*  Bat  Colour,  etc.  of  aqueous,  ig.ieous,  a  id    aerial    bod  ies  are 

non-eternal. — 261  ...          195 


X1T 


SECTION  c. 
Of  Variety  of  Colour,etc.  in  Earth. 

Colour,  etc.  of  terrene  bodies  are  produced  from  like  attri 
butes  in  their  constituent  cause  and  also  from  the  action 
of  heat— 262  ...  196 

Colour. ness,  etc.  are  not  mere  apprehensibility  by  the 
external  senses,  but  are  jdtis  or  universals  which  are 
the  characteristics  of  the  attributes  perceptible  by  the 
external  senses  ...  196-199- 

Process  due  to  the  action  of  heat  is  considered.  Two  views  : 
pithara-pdka  (pot-baking)  and  pilu-pdka  (atom-baking-) 
distinguished  ...  199-202: 

*  Because  the    substance    is    the    same    before    and    after  the 

action  of  heat. — 263  ...          202 

SECTION  D. 
Of  Measure  or  Extension. 

*  The  minute  is  not  perceived  ;  tho  massive  is  perceived. — 264         203- 
Measure  is  of  four  kinds  :  Largeness,  Smallness,  Long-ness, 

and  Shortness  ...          203 

The  universal  substances,  Space,  Time,  Ether,  and  Soul, 
are  also  infinite  in  measure,  i.  e,  possesses  extreme  large 
ness  and  long-ness  ;  extreme  smallnrss  and  shortness 
exist  in  the  ultimate  atoms  ;  the  next  degrees  of  small- 
ness  and  shortness  exist  in  binary  atomic  aggregates  ; 
and  largeness  and  long-ness  exist  in  substances  from 
tertiary  atomic  aggregates  upwards  203 

*  Largeness    is    produced    either    from  multiplicity  of  consti 

tuent  parts,  or  from  their  magnitude,  or  from  their  loose 
conjunction. — 265  204 

A  multiplicity  of  constituent  parts    come    into    combination 

by  the  direction  of  God  204 

*  Smallness  is  produced  from  opposite  causes. — 266  205 
1  Relative    uses  of  '  large    '  and  '  small  '  explained. — 267-269  205-2UU 
'    Largeness  and  Smallness    do    not    exist    in    Largeness    and 

Smallness.— 270,271  207 

*  Largeness    and    Smallness    do    not    exist  in    Attributes  and 

Actions. — 272  207 

*  Long-ness    and    Shortness    do    not    exist    in   Long-ness  and 

Short-ness.. — 273  208 

*  Measure  of  eternal  substances  and  ultimate  atoms  is  eternal, 

and  measure  of  non-eternal  substances    is    non-eternal— 
,   274,275  _  208,209 

Measure  of  the  ultimate  atom   is    called    parimandala. — 276         20(J 
The  existence  of  Measure  in  a  relative  sense  in  perceptible 
bodies,    is    proof    of    the    existence    of  Measure  in  a  roal 
sense  in  imperceptible  substances. — 277  210 

*  Ether  as  well  as  the  Soul  is  infinitely  large 278  210 

The  Mind  is  infinitely  small._279  21.1 

>  Space  is  all-pervading. — 280  212 

*  Time  is  all-pervading. — 281 

Time  is  the  efficient  cause  of  all  that  is  produced  212 


CHAPTER  II. 

Of  Number,  Separateness,  Conjunction,  Disjunction,  Priority, 
Posteriority,  and  Combination. 

SECTION  A. 

Of  Attributes  which  exist  in  one  object  as  well  as  in  more 
than  one  object. 

*  Unity  is  a  different  Attribute. — -282  ...         214 
Bhilsana's  view  criticised  ...         214 

*  Separateness  is  a  different  Attribute. — 283  ...         215 
Separateness  is  distinguished  from  '  mutual    non-existence,' 

difference  in  property,  and  Genus  ...          215 

*  Unity  and  Separateness  do  not  exist  in  Unity  and  Separate- 

ness.— 284  •••         216 

*  Unity  does  not    exist    in    Attributes    and    Actions,    because 

they  are  void  of  Number.— 285,286  ...  216,217 

*  If  Unity  did  not  really  exist,  the  word    could    not    be    used 

even  in  a  relative  sense. — -287  ...         217 

The  Sdmkhyas  hold  that  cause  and  effect  are  one  and  the 
same,  i.  e.  that  unity  and  individuality  belong  to  them. 
This  is  not  correct  •««  217 

•*  Unity  and  Individuality  do  not  exist  in    Effect    and  Cause. 

—288  •••         218 

*  The  characteristic    of  having  the    attributes  of  the  cause  as 

antecedents,  belongs  to  non-eternal    Unity    and    Indivi 
duality.— 289  -.          219 
Other    Numbers    and    Separatenesses     are    derivative,    and 

embrace  more  than  one  substance  ...         21g 

The  conception  of  duality  analysed  ...          221 

How  duality  is  destroyed     ,  ...221-222 

Sridhara,    Udayana,    and    Sanltara-  Misra    on    the    idea    of 

multiplicity  or  manifoldness  ...         223 

The  common  consent  of  humanity  that  a  thing  is  produced 
and  thai  a  thing  is  destroyed,  is  a  refutation  of  the 
Sdmkhya  doctaine  that  cause  and  effect  are  identical  ...  225 

SECTION  B. 
Of  Attributes  which  embrace  more  than  one  object. 

*  Conjunction  and    Disjunction    are  produced  either    by    the 

action  of  one  of  the  substanees  concerned,  or  by  the 
action  of  both,  or  by  another  Conjunction  or  another 
Disjunction.— 290,291.  ....  225,228 

Production  of  things  takes  place  by  means    of    Conjunction         226 
There   is   no    Conjunction  among  all-pervadiug  substances. 

e.  g.  Space,  Time,  Ether,  and  Soul  ...         226 

Conjunction  is  not  eternal  ...          227 

How  Conjunction  is  destroyed  227 

Sarvajna's  view  of  Disjunction  criticised  ...          23( 

How  Disjunction  is  destroyed  ...  231,282 

*  Coniunction  and  Disjunction  do    not    exist    in    Conjunction 

and  Disjunction.— 292,293  ...  232,233 

*  Effect  and    Cause  do    not  possess   Conjunction  and  Disjunc 

tion,  because  they  are  already  in  combination  with  each 
other.— 294  •••  233 


XT! 

• 

SECTION  c. 
Of  Sound  and  Sena?. 

*  The  relation    between    a  Word    and  its    Meaning    is  neither 

Conjunction    nor    Combination,    because    Conjunction  is 
an  Attribute— 295-300  . 

*  Because  Attribute  also  may  be  the  meaning  of  a  Word.  —  296          234- 

*  Because  Word  and  its  Meaning  are  both  inert. — 297  •••  234. 

*  And    because  a  non-entity    also    is  denoted  by  Word. — 298  234 

*  Word  and  its  Meaning  are  therefore  unrelated. — 299          ...  285- 
"*  Intuition  of  Meaning  from  Word    follows  from  Convention. 

-301  23* 

The  convention  is  the  direction  of  God  236 

It  is  learnt  from  usage,  testimony,    analogy,  synonymy,  etc.          236 
Tutata,    Prabhdkara,    the  '  ancients,'    Sankara     Misra,     and 

Gautama  on  the  import  of  Words  ...  237,238- 

Convention    is    twofold  :  original    and    modern.     The    first 

supplies  the  force  of  a  Word  ;  the  second,  the  definition 

of  a  Word  •••         73:T 

SECTION  D. 

Of  Attributes  existing  inonc  substance  and  haviny  reference 
to  all-pervading  substances. 

*  Priority  and  Posteriority  are  produced  by  two  bodies  lying 

in  the  same  direction,  at  the  same    time,  and  being  near 
and  remote. — 302  ...         238' 

How  they  are  destroyed  ...239-241 

*  Priority    and    Posteriority    arise    from    the     nearness     and 

remoteness  of  the  cause. — 303  ...          241 

2    Priority    and    Posteriority    do    not    exist    in    Priority   and 

Posteriority.— 304,306  ...          242" 

SECTION  K. 
Of  Combination. 

*  Combination  is  that  relation    by  virtue    of  which  arises  the 

intuition  in  the  form    of  "  This  is    here,"  with    regard  to 

effect  and  cause.— 307  ...  243 

The  test  of  Consciousness   invoked  ...  244 

Combination   is  eternal  ...  244 

The  view  of  the  Bhattas  considered  ...  245- 

*  Combination  is  different  from  Substance,  Attribute,  Action. 

(jrenus,  and   Species.- — 308  ...          24-j  j 

*  Combination  is   one. — 300  ...          246 
The  followers  of    Prabhdkara    maintarn    that  Combination  is 

manifold,  and  is  non-eternal.  This  is  not  reasonable       ...          246  i 
The  Nydya  doctrine  that  Combination  is    perceptible  to  the 

senses,  is  not   valid  ...          246- 

BOOK  VIII. 

Of    Ordinary    Cognition     by    means    of    Conjunction    or 
Combi  n  ation . 

CHAPTER  I. 
Of  Presentative  Cognition. 

SECTION  A. 

Of  the  Nature  of  Cognition. 
*  Understanding  or  Cognition  is  a  property  of  the  Soul. — 310         247 


XVII 


The  Minkh'ja  doctrine  that  Understanding  is  an  evolute 
o£  I'rakriti  and  a  distinct  entity  from  Soul,  is  not 
reasonable  ...247-24* 

Coo-nition  is  either  true  knowledge  or  false  knowledge  : 
"true  knowledge  is  produced  by  perception,  inference, 
memory,  or  testimony  :  the  forms  of  false  knowledge  are 
doubt,  error,  dream,  and  uncertainty 

*  Soul,  Mind,  Time,  Space,  Air,  Ether,    and    Ultimate    Atoms 

arc  not  knowable  by  ordinary   perception. — 311  248- 

Sense-born  cognition  is  of  two  degrees  :  ordinary  and 
transcendental,  as  of  Yogins  who  can  see  even  ultimate 
atoms  ...  24i* 

All  that  is  demonstrable,  nameable,  and  existent,  is  an 
object  of  sense-cognition,  whether  ordinary  or  trans 
cendental  ...  249 

Ordinary  perception  is  either  discriminative  or  non-dis 
criminative  ...  249 

Dhar-makirti,  and  Dinndya's  argument  against  discrimina 
tive  cognition  stated  and  arswered  ...  249-250 

SECTION  B. 
Of  the  Production  of  Cognition. 

*  Aphorism  111,  i.  18  recalled.—  312   *  ...          25O 

*  Cognition    of     Attribute,     Action,    Genus,    and,.  Species    is 

rendered  possible  by  means  of  the  substances    in    which 

they  inhere. — 313,314  ...  251,252 

*  ilenus    and    Species    are    causes    of  cognition  of  Substance, 

Attribute,  and   Action. — 315  ...          252 

*  Substance,  Attribute,  and      Action    are  causes  of  cognition 

of  Substance— 316  ...         253 

*  Attribute  and  Action  are  not  causes  of    cognition  of  Attri 

bute  and   Action. — 317  ...          253 

*  Combination  is  a  cause  of  cognition. — 318  ...          254 

*  Successive  cognitions  of  a  pillar,  a  jar,  etc.   are  not  related 

as  cause  and   effect-—  319,320  ...          255 

Cognition  is  either  presentative  or  representative.  Presen- 
tativo  cognition  is  either  perception  or  inference. 
Perception  is  either  discriminative  or  non-discrimina 
tive  :  again,  either  ordinary  or  transcendental-  Infer- 
once  is  either  from  agreement,  or  from  difference, or  from 
commonly  observed  marks  ...  25ti 

Cognition    is    either    true    knowledge    or  false  knowledge  : 

jicrain.  either  certitude  or  doubt  ...          257 

CHAPTER  II. 
Of  Doubly  Preset  tntive  Cognition. 

SECTION  A. 
Of  Proof  of  Involved  Cognition. 

*  '  This/  ;  That  '  'Done    by   you  '  <  Feed    him,'     are    instances 

of  cognition  involving  cognition  of    another    thing. — 321         25$ 

*  Tho  proof  is  that  such  cognitions  arise  in  respect  of  objects 

seen,  and  do  not  arise  in  respect  of  objects  not  seen. — 322         258 

SECTION  B. 
Of  the  Meaning  of  Artha  (Object)  in  the  Vaijusika. 

*  Substance,  Attribute,  and  Action  are  called  Object.* — 323  ...        259 


* 


SECTICK  c. 

Of  the  Senses  and  their  Objects. 

Bodies  are  not  compound  products  of  five  elements.— 824  ... 
Senses  are  relative  to  their  corresponding  attributes  25i> 

*  The  Sense  of  Smell  is    constituted    by  the  element  of  Earth. 

—-325  *"          -39? 

*  Similarly    the    Senses    of    Taste.     Colour,    and    Touch     are 

constituted    by    the    elements  of  Water,  Fire,  and  Air- 

326 

Likewise    the    Sense    of    Hearing  is  a  portion  of  Ether  con 
fined  within  the  cavity  of  the  ear 

BOOK  IX. 

Of  Ordinary  and  Transcendental  Cognition  by  means  of 
presentation  other  than  Conjunction  and  Combination. 

CHAPTER  I. 
Of  Ordinary  Perception  of  Non -Existence 

and 
Of  Transcendental  Perception. 

SF.CTIOX  A. 
Of  Enumeration  and  Demonstration  of  Non-Ed  ixtencc*. 

*  An  effect    cannot,    before    its    production,    be    spoken   of  in 

terms  of  action  and  attribute,  and  is  therefore  then  non 
existent. — 327 

*  The  existent  becomes  non-existent. 

*  The  existent  is  quite  different  from  the  non-existent.-  -329...          2f»4 

*  What  is  existent  in  one  form  (e.  </.    a  horse)   is    non-existent 

in  another  form(e.  g.  as  a  cow)  —330 
Such  reciprocal  non-existence  is   eternal 

*  There  is  a  fourth    kind    of  non-existence  kno\vn  as  absolute 

non-existence. — 331 

The    ancients'    and    the    moderns'    view    of    absolute     non- 
existence 

SECTION   i; 

Of  the  Ptrception  of  Non -exist  en?  i-. 

*  Absence  of  perception    after    destruction,    and    recollection 

of  existence  before  destruction,  are  causes  of  perception 

of  consequent  non-existence.- -332  •••          26fi 

*  Perceptibility  after  pi  eduction  is  the    cause    of    perception 

of  non-existence  before  production. — -333  267 

*  Non-apprehension  of  identity  is  the  cause  of  the  perception 

of  reciprocal  non-existence. — 334  •••          ^tW 

*  Non-cognizance  of  production  and  destruction    is  the    cause 

of  the  perception  of  absolute  non-existence. — 335  2Ht>' 

*  The  judgment  "  The  water-pot  does  not,    exist  in  the  room." 

merely  negates  the  connection  of  the    existent    water- pot 
with  the  room. — 336  -'* 

SECTION  o. 

Of  Transcendental  Perception. 

*  Perceptual  cognition  of  the  Soul    results    from  a    particular 

conjunction  of  the  Soul  and  the  Mind  in    the    Soul. — 337         272^ 


XIX 


* 


* 


•* 


SECTION  D. 
Of  Nescience. 

Dreain  is  produced  in   the  same  way  as    Reminiscence.— 348 
Intensity    of    impressions,    derangement  of  the    bumours  of 

the  body,  and  adristam  are  causes  of  dreaming  ...          291 

Dreams,  good  and  evil,  described  291 

So  is  also  "  Consciousness  accompanying   dreams. "3 49   ...,,       292 

Pratastapdda's  and  VrittiJcdra'*  views  on  Dream  stated       ...         292 
>  Merit  and  De-Merit  also  cause   Dream  and  Dream-memory. 

350                                                                                                  ^^         292 
1  Nescience  or  False  Knowledge  arises    from    imperfection  of 
the  Senses  and  also    from    imperfection  of   ImDression. 

OKI  T 

293 

1  Avidyd  or  False  Knowledge    is  imperfect  knowledge. — 352...          293 
The    forms     of    A-vidyd     are     Doubt,     Error,    Dream,     and 

Indecision  go^ 

SECTION  E. 
Of  Scientific  Cognition. 

*  Scientific    Cognition   is  cognition    free    from    Imperfection 

~363  ...         294 

SECTION  F 
Of  Cognition  by  Seers  and  Siddhas. 

*  The  cognition  of  Seers  and    Siddhaa    takes  place    by  means 

of  merit. — 354  295 

Vfiltiledra's  and  PraSastapada' s  views  stated  295 

BOOK  X. 

Of  the    Differences    of  the   Attributes  of  the  Soul  and  of 
the  threefold  Causes. 

CHAPTER  I. 
Of  the  Attributes  of  the  Soul. 

*  Pleasure    and    Pain    are    different    objects,  because  of   the 

difference    of    their    causes  and  because  of    their  mutual 
opposition. — 355  29ft 

Prafastapdda's  view  stated  296 

*  They  are  not  forma  of  Cognition.— 356-360  ...  297-300 

*  The  relation  of  the  body  and  its  parts  explained. — 361  301 

CHAPTER  II. 
Of  the  Threefold  Causes, 

SECTION  A. 

Of  Combinative  and  Non-combinative  caiise. 

Substance  is  the  only  combinative  cause. — 362  .,.         302 

It  operates  as  an  efficient  cause  also.~-363  ...          303 

Actions  are  non-cornbinative  causes 364  ...         304 

Certain  Attributes  are    non-combinative    causes,  and  occa 
sionally  operate  as  efficient  causes  also 365  ...         304 

*  Conjunction  is  a  non-combinative  cause. — 366,367  ...         804 

SKGTION  B. 
Of  Efficient  Cause. 

*  Heat  is  an  efficient  cause. — 368  ...         305 

SECTION  c. 
Of  Transcendental  Utility  of  Acts. 

*  Of  acts  enjoined,   of    which    worldly    good    is  not  the  fruit, 

the  utility  is  transcendental. — 369  ...         305 


or  ascetics  are  either  yukta  or  meditative,  or  viyukta 
or  non-meditative.  The  former  have  perceptual  cogni 
tion  of  the  Soul.  The  Soul  sometimes  flashes  across 
ordinary  hmte  consciousness  272 

Transcendental  presentation  discussed  272 

>  Similarly,  by  means  of;  Meditation,  omniscience  is  attained! 

—  273 

<•  Omniscience  also  belongs  to  the  viyukta  or  supra-meditative* 

».  «.  those  who  have  reached  the  state  of   independence  of 

the  sense-apparatus 339  2^  . 

How  they  exhaust  their  karma,  is  described  274 

Ihe  Yogin*  perceive    Attributes    and  Actions    through  their 

combination  in  Substances. 340 

They    perceive    the    attributes    of    their  own  souls  through 

their  combination  in  their  souls— o41 
An  argument  that  Kandda  recognises  only  three    independ- 

fint     Pr«<l  i  <>ahiQa  *  f     "** 


Of  Other  Forms  of  Cognition. 

SECTION  A. 
Of  Inference. 
*  the  effect,  or  cause  of,  conjunct    with,  contradictory 

"    tl"8 


27r 
o~r 


97  t\ 

CHAPTER  II. 


Three  views  of  P*k»a  or  the  minor  term  described  07- 

Lingo,  or  inferential  mark  (the  middle  term)  discussed  277 

Place  of    Pardmarja    or    subsumption    of    the    mark    in  the' 

process  of  inference  discussed 
Different  forms  of  Inference  described  «!« 

^^J  °f  ratUr*  i8/^  baS1'8  °f    Infer«™e,   »nd  not  the 
relation  of  Cause  and  Effect. 343 

How  Uniformity  of  Nature  is  established 

Two  kinds  of  Inference,  logical  and  rheiorical,  described"  281 

Syllogism  analysed  and  illustrated     tha  terra  pratijnd   hetu 

uddharana,  upanaya,  and  niyamana  explained  281 

The  Vaisesika  terminology  stated  and  explained  282 

SECTION  B. 

Of  Testimony  and  Other  Forms  of  Proof 

Verbal  is  a  form  of  Inferential  Cognition.— 344  o«o 

Gesture,  whether  conventional  or    non-conventional,    is  not 

a  form  of  Proof 

'  Reason,  Word    Mark,  (Met^s    of)  Proof,  Instrument,   the's'e" 

are  not-  antonyms. — 345 

Analogy,  Presumption,  Subsumption,  Privation,  and  Tradi 
tion  are  included  in  Inference,  because  they  proceed  by 
the  cognition  of  the  Uniformity  of  Nature.~-346  28" 

SKCTION  c. 
Of  Reminiscence. 
Reminiscence  takes  place    from  a  particular  conjunction  of 

the  Soul  aud  the  Mind  and  from  past  impression.-437..          290 
FrasaetapAda  «  explanaiion  quoted  «Q« 

How  sagely  cognition  is   produced 

•  •  •        fi  y  * 


XXI 


The  Veda  is  not    impersonal,  and  is  the    work  of    a  Supreme 
Person  absolutely  free  from  imperfection 
The  purpose  of  sacred    observance  is  to  purify  the  mirror  of 
the  mind 

SECTION   D. 
Of  the  Author  of  the  Veda. 

The  Veda  is  the  work  of  God.— 370  307 

The  argument  fully  stated  307 


THE  VAJSESJKA  SUTRAS  OF  KANADA 

WITH    THR 

COMMENTARY  OF  SANKARA  MISRA 

AND 

3XTUACTS   FROM  THE  GLOSS  OF  J  AYANARAYANA. 

AXD 

Till-:   BHASYA  OF    CHAXDRAK  ANTA. 

SAXKAKA   MISRA'S  INTRODUCTION. 

Salutation  to  Sri   (Janesa  ! 

I  bow  to  llara  who  has  the  Heavenly  lliver  playing  on  the  lap 
if  His  uptied  matted  locks,  and  whose  forehead  is  adorned  with  the 
Umbel li slier  of  the  Night. 

Mv  Salutations  constantly  reach  those  two,  Kanada  and  Bliava- 
ntitha,  by  whom  I  have  been  thoroughly  enlightened  in  the  Vaisesika 
System. 

Xole. — Kamula  here  does  not  refer  to  the  author  of  the    Vaisesika-Sutram,   but   to  a    >vell- 
known  Yaisesika  teacher  of  a  recent  date. 

'lihavanatha  was  the  father  of  Sankara  MiSra. 

May  success  attend  this  venture  of  mine  who,  like  a  funambulist; 
in  the  air.  walk  here  without  any  support,  with  the  only  help  of  the 
Sutram. 

_y0<e Sutraiii — a.    piece    of    rope  ;  an    aphorism  ;  just    as  a    rope-daucer    walks  in  the  air 

with    the   help    (A    a    (Sutram    (rope),    so   the    commentator    traverses    the    philosophy    of   tho 
Vaisesikiis  with  the  help  of  the  Sutram  (aphorisms)  of  Kamula. 

Human  existence  is  subject  to  threefold  afflictions.  These 
afflictions  are  partly  adhyatmika,  i.e.,  bodily  and  mental.  They  are 
partly  Adhibhautiku,' i.e.,  caused  by  natural  agencies,  e.  g.  man,  beast, 
bird,  reptile  and  the  immobile.  And  they  are  partly  adhidaiyika,  i.e., 
caused  by  supernatural  powers,  such  as  Yaksa,  llaksasa,  Vinayaka, 
-etc.  Discriminative  men,  struck  with  the  threefold  afflictions,  looked 
for  the  root-cause  of  the  cessation  of  the  threefold  afflictions.  They 
gathered  from  the  various  Srutis  (Revelations),  Smritis  (Recollections), 
Ftihasas  (Histories),  and  Purunas  (Cosmogonies),  that  it  is  the  imme 
diate  intuition  or  direct  vision  of  the  principle  of  the  self,  or  simply, 
self-reali/.ation,  which  is  that  cause.  They  then  desired  to  know  the 
path  also  which  led  to  the  attainment  of  self-realization.  Accordingly- 
they  approached  the  very  kind  sage  (muni)  Kanada. 


VAI£ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


Now,  the  Muni  Kanada  had  accomplished  the  knowledge  of  the  prin 
ciples  (tattvas),    dispassion,  and  lordliness.     He  thought    within    himself  | 
that  the  knowledge  of  the    principles  of  the  six   padarthas  (predicables),  I 
by  means  of  their    resemblances  and    differences,  is  the    only  royal  road 
to  the    attainment    of    self-realization,    and    that    that    would  be    easily  1 
accomplished    by  the  disciples  through  the  dharrna  (Merit   or  Worth)  of 
renunciation.     He  therefore    resolved  first   to  teach    them  dharma  alone 
with  reference  to  its  essential  form  and  with    reference  to  its   character 
istics,    and    then  to    teach    them    also    the    six    padfirthas    by    means  of 
their  enumeration,  definition,  and  demonstration. 

Note. — Dharma    of   renunciation. — The    indirect    method    of   Self-realization  is    Pravritti 
Marga,  i.  e.  through  and  by  means  of  wordly  experience.     The  direct  method  of  Self-realization  - 
is  Nivritti  Marga,  i.  e.  through  and  by  means  of  abandonment  of  worldly  experience. 

Hence,  to  invite  their  attention,  he  proposes. 
Jay andrdy ana's  Introduction. 

He  who  of  His  own  will  spreads  out  the  production,  preservation, 
and  destruction  of  the  universe;  He  who,  even  though  shining  forth 
in  suppression  of  all  these,  still  is  not  known  by  other  than  wise  men  ; 
He,  by  knowing  whom  as  He  is  in  Himself,  men  are  saved  from  further  | 
immersion  into  the  waves  of  the  stream  of  transmigration  ;  the  same  is 
Bhava  (i.e.,  the  Lord  of  Creation),  and  He  is  easy  of  access  by  the  path 
of  communion  with  Him  in  constant  devotion.*  Mayj-  He  be  pleased  t<- 
give  you  prosperity. 

I  adore    Bhavani  (the    consort    of    Bhava),    Mahesi     (the    consort  of 
Mahesa,  the  Great    Lord;,  who,    Herself    bearing    limbs  as    dark    as  th&j 
cloud,  still  dispels  the  mass  of    darkness  by    myriads  of    collected  rays  ;. 
who  while  cutting  asunder  the  bond  of  re-birth  of  Her  devotees,  is   Her-j 
self    bound  by    love    to    Bhava    and    is    His    constant     delighter;    who! 
although  She  is  born  of  the  Immobile  (the  Himalaya),  ^ still    moves    from] 
place  to  place;  and  who  while    being  the    consort   of  the    Pure  (Siva),  is- 
seated  on  a  corpse. 

After    bowing    to    his     good    preceptor,    the    fortunate    twice-born  r 
Jayanarayana  is  writing  out  the  vivriti  (explanation    or  elaboration)  of 
the  aphorisms  of  Kanada  for  the  pleasure  of  Isvara. 

Here,  indeed,  one  and  all  of  the  disciples,  desiring  to  throw  off  the 
multitude  of  afflictions  arising  from  birth,  decrepitude,  death,  and  the 
like,  hear  from  the  various  Srutis,  Smritis,  Itihasas,  Puranas,  etc.,  that 
the  vision  of  the  reality  of  the  Self  is  the  fundamental  means  of  escaping 
them.  Thus,  there  is  the  £ruti :  "  Verily,  verily,  the  Self  is  to  be  seen, 
to  be  heard  about,  to  be  thought  over,  and  meditated  upon.  V  erilyj 
O  verily,  this  is  (the  measure  of)  immortality7'  (Bnhadaranyaka  2  4,  5;; 
also,  "  When  the  Purusa  (the  in-dweller)  will  know  himself— the  Self- 
"I  am,"  then  wishing  'what,  for  which  desire,  will  he  pursue  the  course 
of  transmigration?"  And  the  Smriti  also:  "By  elaborating  his  under 
standing  in  three  ways,  namely  by  "sacred  writings,  inference,  and 
habitual  flow  of  contemplation,  a  person  attains  to  laudable  com 


munion. 


C'f.     Narada  Bhakti  Stitrarn,  aphorism  58   p.  23,  S.  B.  H.,  Vol.  VII. 
t  Cf     Sandilya-Sutram,  III,  1,  7,|page  7If,S.  B.  H.,  Vol.  VII. 


KANADA  SIJTRAS  I,  1,  1. 


Now,  some  disciples,  who  were  unenvious  and  who  had  properly 
studied  the  Vedas  and  the  Vedaiigas,  (i-e.,  treatises  regarded  as  so  many 
limbs  as  it  were  of  the  Vedas)  and  had  also  achieved  the  gravana 
(i.e.,  the  stage  of  self-culture  known  by  the  name,  audition,  in  other 
words,  the  mere  acquisition  of  knowledge  or  information  as  referred 
to  in  the  preceding  paragraph^,  with  due  rites  approached  the  great 
and  mighty  sage  Kaiuida  for  the  purpose  of  manana  or  intellection  (the 
second  stage  of  self-culture,  i.e.,  that  of  discriminative  understanding). 
Thereupon  that  sage,  full  of  great  compassion,  taught  them  a  system 
(of  self-culture)  in  Ten  Books.  There  in  the  First  Book  he  has  stated 
the  entire  group  of  paddrtlias  (Predicables);  in  the  Second  Book  he 
has  ascertained  Substance;  in  the  Third  Book  he  has  described  the 
Soul  and  the  Inner  Sense;  in  the  Fourth  Book  he  has  discussed  the 
body  and  its  constituents;  in  the  Fifth  Book  he  has  established  Kama, 
(Action);  in  the  Sixth  Book  he  has  considered  Dharma  (piety)  according 
to  &ruti  ;  in  the  Seventh  Book  he  has  established  Attribute  and  tiamavdya 
(co-inherence  or  combination)  ;  in  the  Eighth  Book  he  has  ascertained 
the  manifestation  of  knowledge,  its  source,  and  soon;  in  the  Ninth 
Book  he  has  established  particular  or  concrete  understanding;  and  in 
the  Tenth  Book  lie  has  established  the  differences  of  the  attributes  of 
the  Soul. 

The  operation  ot  this  treatise  (towards  teaching)  is  three-fold: 
Enumeration,  Definition,  and  Examination  or  Demonstration.  Classi 
fication  or  Division  is  a  particular  form  of  Enumeration;  and  hence  it 
does  not  constitute  an  additional  method. 

Although  this  system  is  mainly  concerned  with  the  determination 
of  the  Predicables,  still,  inasmuch  as  Dharma,  being  at  the  root  of  the 
knowledge  of  the  essence  of  the  Predicables,  possesses  a  prominence  of 
its  own,  therefore  he  (Kanada)  proposes  to  ascertain  that  (Dharma}  first 
of  all. 

Dharma  t'.y  to  If-  f.i>plaiiif'<1. 

w?  sq^qr^nr:  ii  ?  I  ?  I  m 


Sl«r  Atha,  now.       ?[?T:     Atah,     therefore,     [^wfc    JDliarmmam,    piety, 
religi.  n.     sqreqWTW:  Vyakhyasyamah,  (We)  shall  explain. 


1.     Now,  therefore,  we  shall  explain  Dharma.  —  1. 

Cpatkai-a.—'  Atha,'  indicates   sequence  to  the    desire    of   the    disciples;    '  Atah'—  Because 
disciples,  skilful  in,  SVeu'crua     (audition),    etc,    and    uneiivioud,   approached   (him),"   therefore 
<fr  the  word  '  atha'  has  the  sense   of   auspiciousness.     For  it   has  been  said  :     "  Q,nk  Ira  (aum 
and  the  word  .-tt/ia—  these  two   came  out,   at  the    beginning,  by  breaking  through  the  throat  of 
Brahma  ;  hence  both  of  them  are  auspicious."     Audit    is   as    it  should"  be.     How,   otherwise 
is  it  possible  on  the  part  of  the   great    sago,    while    composing   the    Vaisesika    system    of    self' 
culture,    not   to    observe    the    auspicious    ceremony,  which  has  acquired  the  obligatory  nature 
Of  a  duty,    by  a  succession  of  observances  by   pious,  men  ?     It   cannot    be    said,   on    the   other 
side,  that  the  non-observance  might  be    due  to  the  experience    of   the    non-appearance  of   fruit 
even  where  the    auspicious    ceremony  has    been    observed   and  of  the  appearance  of  fruit  even 
where  it  has  not  been  observed  ;  since  a  wise  man  does  not  engage  in   a    useless  pursuit      For 
its   usefulness   becomes   certain   on   the  supposition  of  its  observance  in  another  birth  'in  the 
case  of  the  above  non-observance  where  the  fruit  still  appears,  and  of  defect    in  some   part   (of 
the  ceremony)  in  the  case  of  the  above  observance,  where  the  fruit  does  not  still  appear 


VAISESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


Again,  there  need  be  also  no  apprehension  of  its  uselcssness  merely  on  account  of  the  non- 
appearanco,  for  the  time  being,  of  the  fruit  of  that,  the  obligatory  nature  of  which  has  bet  n 
taught  in  the  >Sruti  ami  can  be  inferred  from  the  conduct  of  the  elect  or  polite.  Nor  i,s  it  that 
there  can  be  no  supposition  of  .something  in  another  birth  since  an  act  must  produce  it.s  fruit 
in  this  (one)  life  only  ,•  because,  as  in  the  case  of  the  sacrifice  for  the  birth  of  a  son,  so  in 
every  act  the  characteristic  of  producing  fruit  in  one  and  the  same  life  is  not  proved  to  exist. 
Whereas  the  characteristic  of  producing  fruit  in  one  and  the  same  life  belongs  to  Kt'ir'trl 
(sacrifice  for  rain)  and  other  sacrifices,  because  these  are  performed  with  that  desire  alone. 
Here  the  agent  is  desirous  of  completion,  as  the  agent  in  a  sacrifice  is  desirous  of  heaven.  The 
difference  is  that  there  the  object  (of  the  observance)  is  a  ne-,v  entrance  in  the  shape  of 
ftdriftam,  while  here  it  is  the  annihilation  of  hindrances,  since  the  undertaking  is  with  the 
desire  that  what  has  been  begun  may  be  safely  completed. 


tt  cannot  be  said  that  the  fruit  of  the  observance  is  tlie  mere  an 
nihilation  of  hindrances  while  completion  will  follow  from  its  own 
cause.  For,  the  mere  annihilation  of  obstacles  is  not  in  itself  an  object 
of  volition,  whereas  completion  as  the  means  of  happiness  is  an  objV.-t  of 
volition,  and  it  is  also  uppermost  in  the  mind.  Moreover,  the  mere 
destruction  of  demerits  is  not  the  fruit,  for  that  being1  otherwise  capable 
of  accomplishment  by  propitiation,  singing  the  name  of  God,  crossing 
the  river  Karmanasfi,  etc.,  there  will  be  plurality  of  causes,  i.e  ,  a 
violation  of  the  rule  (that  only  the  observance  of  the  omen  will  produce 
the  result).  If  it  is  held  that  the  destruction  of  demerits  is  the  end,  as 
the  destruction  of  the  particular  demerits  which  obstruct  the  fulfil  ment 
of  the  undertaking,  then  the  fulfilment  itself  properly  becomes  the  end. 
Here  too  there  will  be  a  violation  of  the  rule,  since  such  destruction  of 
particular  demerits  is  producible  by  gift  of  gold,  bathing1  ^at  the  con 
fluence  (of  the  GangA  and  Yamuna)  at  Prayaga  (Allahabad),  etc. ;  and 
it  will  be  rash  to  speak  of  them  as  so  many  good  omen^. 

Again,  the  causality  of  the  good  omen  consists  in  this  that  it  being 
observed,  the  completion  must  necessarily  follow.  So  it  has  been  said: 
"Because  of  the  rule  that  the  fruit  necessarily  results  from  an  act. 
complete  in  all  its  parts,  according  to  the  Veda."  Hence  an  alternative- 
cause  also  is  certainly  a  cause,  for  the  idea  of  a  cause  in  the  Veda 
refers  only  to  the  uniformity  of  immediateness  or  to  the  immediate- 
sequence  of  the  effect.  It  is  perverse  to  suppose  a  difference  in  kind 
in  the  effects,  in  the  case  of  a  plurality  of  causes.  "Where  causal  it  v  has 
to  be  deduced  from  agreement  and  difference,  there  the  rule  of  ante 
cedence  to  the  effect  should  lie  observed,  but  not  in  the  Yeda  also, 
where  the  appearance  of  difference  does  not  figure  as  a  weighty  con 
sideration.  Thus  it  is  not  a  violation  of  the  rule  to  say  that  the- 
omen  being  observed  in  all  its  parts,  the  completion  necessarily 
follows. 

Now,  completion  or  fulfilment  is  that  on  the  performance  of  which 
arises  the  belief  that  this  act  has  been  completed.  In  the  case  of  writings 
it  consists  in  the  writing  of  the  last  sentence;  in  the  case  of  a  sacrifice,., 
etc.,  in  the  final  oblation;  in  the  case  of  a  cloth,  etc..  in  the  addition  of 
the  last  thread  ;  in  the  case'  of  going  to  a  village,  etc.,  in  the  final  con 
tact  of  the  feet  with  the  village  :  and  it  should  be  similarly  undetstood 
in  all  other  cases.  Therefore  in  the  case  of  completion  produced  by  an 
auspicious  observance-,  even  if  we  suppose  a  difference  in  kind  in  the- 
effect,  still  there  is  no  violation  of  the  rule  of  agreement  and  diffe 
rence. 


KANADA  SUTRAS  I,  1,  2. 


An  auspicious  observance  is  an  act  which  brings  about  fulfilment 
as  its  fruit  by  the  path  of  the  annihilation  of  obstacles,  and  that  is 
real  I  v  of  the  form  of  salutation  to  the  deity,  etc.  Even  where  obstacles 
do  not  exist  of  themselves,  although  the  commonly  attributed  (as  above; 
charactei'sitic  of  issuing  by  the  path  of  the  annihilation  of  obstacles  is 
absent  there,  still  the  idea  of  the  auspicious  observance  is  not  too 
narrow,  because  the  salutation,  etc.,  as  such,  possess  the  incidence  of 
tlie  characteristic  of  issuing  by  the  path  of  the  annihilation  of  obstacles 
This  is  the  point. — 1. 

The  ]'irTt>ti  adds :  Others  again  say  that  the  non-existence  of  any 
hindrance  having  been  insured  by  the  virtue  born  of  concentration 
()V<t/a),  the  sage  did  not  attend  to  the  auspicious  observance,  or  that  if 
lie  did.  he  has  not  inserted  that  at  the  beginning  of  the  book.  Later 
thinkers,  on  the  other  hand,  say  that,  as  in  the  treatise  of  (lautama  (i.f .. 
Nvaya  Sutra),  in  the  recital  of  the  word  yramana  (Proof;  which  falls, 
witliiu  the  group  of  the  names  of  Grod,  so  too  in  this  treatise,  the 
auspicious  ceremony  has  been  observed,  in  the  form  of  reciting  the 
word  {Ihannci,  which  also  is  a  synonym  of  God. 

It  should  be  understood  here  that  dliarma  leads  up  to  knowledge 
by  the  way  of  the  purification  of  the  mind  (chitta),  thirst  after  know 
ledge,  and  so  on.  Tor  the  Areda  says:  "They  come  to  thirst  after  know 
ledge  by  the  performance  of  sacrifices,"  etc.  And  says  the  Smriti  also.. 
•"Knowledge  is  produced  after  demerits  or  dark  deeds  have  been  dest 
royed  by  good  acts." 

Chandrak&nta  : — The  classification  of  Ulianna  is  not  shown  by 
Kan  (id  a,  as  it  does  not  fall  within  the  scope  of  his  philosophy  ;  for,  he 
lias  undertaken  the  Sdstra  with  the  object  of  teaching  Tattva-Jnanani, 
knowledge  of  the  essences  or  principles,  only. 

Definition  of  Dharma. 

:  ii  ?  I  n  ^  ii 

W.  Yatah,  whence.  Wfg^-fsfcSTWferfe;:  Abhyudaya-nihsreyasa- 
siddhih.  Exaltation,  Supreme  (rood.  Accomplishment.  ST:  Sah,  that,  gn?: 
Dharmah,  Piety,  Religion. 

2.     Dharma  (is)  that    from    which    (results)    the    accomplish 
ment  of  Exaltation  and  of  the  Supreme  Good.— 2. 

Ifpashira. — Now  lie  describes  the  subject  proposed  : 

'  Abhyudaya '  means  knowledge  of  the  essences.  <  Nihsreyasam  '  is 
•final  cessation  of  pain.  That  from  which  both  of  them  result  is  (Jli.an,ia. 
The  compound  of  the  two  words,  rendered  as  'nihsreyasa'  by  the  path 
of  'abhyudaya,'  belongs  to  that  class  of  compounds  which  are  formed 
l>y  the  elision  of  the  middle  term:  or  it  is  a  Tat-puriwa  compound 
ablatively  formed. 

This  dliarma  will  be  later  on  described  as  being  characterised  by 
forbearance.  If  it  is  the  effect  of  constant  contemplation  and  other 
practices  of  iogo  and  is  the  same  as  adrittam  (the  invisible,  potential 
after  effects  of  actions,  or  Merit  and  Demerit),  then  it  is  producible  by 
positive  performances. 


6  VA1&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


The  Vrittikara,  however,  says:  uAbhyudaya'  is  happiness,  and 
4  nihsreyasam  '  the  simultaneous  annihilation  of  all  the  particular  attri 
butes.  (-i.e.,  modifications)  of  the  Soul.  The  proof  is  that  in  the  case  of 
dharma,  the  body,  etc.,  of  Devadatta  are  made  up  of  eleme  its  s  »  direct 
ed  by  the  particular  attributes  of  the  enjoyer  or  sufferer,  and  as  they 
are  products  or  effects,  they  are,  as  the  means  of  his  enjoyment  or 
experience,  like  a  garland  made  by  himself."  Now,  this  explanation 
has  been  discarded  by  superficial  readers  as  being  not  wide  enough  to 
apply  to  each  and  all  (a).  Whereas  in  fact  "what  is  dharma  ?  and  what 
its  characteristic  ?"  —  the  enquiry  of  the  disciples  being  of  such  a 
general  nature,  the  answer  comes,  "That  from  which  (results)  the 
accomplishment  of  Exaltation  and  of  the  Supreme  (food." 

Thus,  that  which  leads  to  the  attainment  of  Exaltation,  and  also 
that  which  leads  to  the  attainment  of  the  Supreme  Good,  both  of  them 
are  dharma.  Thus  that  the  invariable  cause  of  the  object  of  volition  is 
dharma,  being  the  matter  to  be  expressed,  the  expression  "the  accom 
plishment  of  Exaltation  and  of  the  Supreme  (rood  "  has  been  used  with 
the  object  of  specially  introducing  the  two  great  objects  of  volition,  r/z., 
happiness  and  absence  of  pain.  Because  paradise  and  emancipation 
are  the  only  great  objects  of  volition,  being  the  objects  of  desire  which 
is  not  dependent  upon  desire  for  ulterior  objects.  And  it  will  be  shown 
that  the  absence  of  pain  also  is  an  object  of  volition.  ___  2. 

[Note.—  (.a)  "  Not    wide    enough    to    apply  to  each  and  all."—  The  separate  characteristics 

are  that  it  produces  pleasure  and  that  it  produces  the    Supreme   (!ood.     The    former   does    nob 

include  the  dharma  of  mvritti  and  tiie  latter    does  not    include  the  dharma  of    pravriui       Tho 

characteristic   is    that  it    produce.,  both  pleasure  and  the  .Supreme  Good.'    And  this 

does  not  include  that  which  produces  pleasure    only,    nor    that   which   produce  the  Supreme 

<,ood  only      Thus  the  definition  of  dharma  as  explained  by  the  Vrittikara  is  in  cither  case  too 

IK,  according  to  Upasknra,  the  view  of  superficial  readers.] 

Chandrakdnta  :—WliereZrom  does  the  production  of  the  good  and 
the  ultimate  good  result?  The  production  of  the  good  and  of  the 
ultimate  good  results  from  Pracritti,  activity  or  employment,  that  is 
observed  in  the  world,  or)  exertion  of  the  speech,  the  mind,  and  the 
body  Therein,  it  is  said,  that  a  person  cultivates  Jjjta.-ma  with  the 
speech,  by  telling  agreeable  a.,d  wholesome  truths  and  by  studying  the 
sacred  writings;  with  the  mind,  by  showing  compassion,  contentment, 
and  faith;  with  the  body,  by  practising  charity  and  by  relieving  the 
poor  and  the  distressed  and  those  who  are  in  danger.  q^  *ERq  «?a 
?«rKanf  H*Mfor—  This  text  of  the  Veda  also  shows  that 
Dharma  is  the  designate  of  the  word,  "  yajati,"  to  perfcrm  (sacrifices, 

€tc.) 

And  this  Dharma  is  subsidiary,  because  it  subserves  taf.tcajn:"<namf 
knowledge  of  the  principles  ;  which  is  the  principal  Dharma,  'because 
it  is  the  means  of  the  supreme  good. 

Authority  <>f  tha   Veda. 

1  1  ?  n  \\  II 


Tad-vachanfit,  ber.ig*  His  Word   or    declaration,  or   its    (of 
dharma*)    exposition.    ?n*crpK9   Amnayasya,     of  the    Veda. 
manyam,  authoritativeness. 


KANADA  SUTRAS  I,  1,  3. 


3.     The  authoritativeness  of  the  Veda  (arises  from    its)    being 
the  Word  of  God  [or  being  an  exposition  of  dharma]. —  3. 

Upaski'ira. — It  may  be  objected,  "  Well,  the  Veda  is  the  authority  for  this  that  dhurmtt 
characterised  by  nivritti  is  the  source  of  the  Supreme  Good  by  means  of  the  knowledge  of  the 
essence  or  reality.  But  we  are  doubtful  about  the  authoritativeness  of  the  Voda  itself,  ou 
•account  of  the  faults  of  falsity,  contradiction,  and  repetition.  Falsity  is  shown  by  the  non- 
production  of  the  son,  even  after  the  sacrifice  for  a  son  has  been  performed.  The  homn 
(oblation  to  tire)  after  sun-rise,  etc.,  actually  prescribed  in  the  ordinances  '  He  offers  oblation 
unto  fire  after  sunrise,  he  offers  oblation  unto  tiro  before  runrise,  he  offers  oblation  unto  lire 
at  a  belated  hour,'  is  counteracted  by  suen  t  ixts  as  '  oyava  (a  dog  of  Yamaj  eats  up  the  oblation 
of  him  who  oilers  oblation  unto  fire  alter  sunrise,  Savala  (the  other  dog  of  Yama)  eats  up  the 
oblation  of  him  who  offers  oblation  unto  fire  before  sunrise,  $yava  and  savala  eat  up  the 
oblation  of  him  who  offers  oblation  unto  fire  at  a  belated  hour,'  etc.  And  repetition  surely 
appears  from  the  mention  of  the  thrico  recital  of  the  first  and  the  last  Stimidheni  (the  Rik 
III.  27.  1-11.  directed  to  kindle  fire)  in  '  He  will  recite  the  first  for  three  times,  he  will  recite 
the  last  for  three  times.'  Beside  there  is  nothing  to  establish  the  authoritativeness  of  the 
Veda.  Its  eternality  being  uncertain,  its  eternal  freedom  from  defect  also  becomes  doubtful. 
On  the  other  hand,  if  it  is  the  product  of  a  human  brain,  then  by  the  possibility  of  mistake, 
oversight,  uncertainty,  want  of  skill  in  the  author,  etc.,  its  characteristic  of  being  the 
infallible  testimony  of  a  great  and  good  (apta)  man,  certainly  becomes  doubtful.  Thus  there 
is  no  Supreme  Good,  nor  is  knowledge  of  reality  its  means,  nor  again  is  d/iarma.  Thus  all 
this  remains  uncertain." 

To  meet  this  objection  he  says  : 

'  Tat  '  alludes  to  God  whose  existence  is  well-known,  although  the 
word  does  not  appear  in  the  context  ;  as  in  the  aphorism  of  Gautamar 
"  That  is  nuauthoritative  on  account  of  the  faults  of  falsity,  contradic 
tion,  and  repetition,"  the  Veda  is  alluded  to  by  the  word  Hat','  althougfh- 
it^does  not  appear  in  the  context.  Thus  'tadvachanat,'  means  bei;;g- 
the  composition  of  Him,  Isvara  ;  <•  amnayasya, '  of  the  Veda  ;  <pra- 
manyam.'  Or,'  'tat'  refers  to  dharma  only  which  is  close  by  i.  e.,  in  the 
context.  Thus,  of  dharma  ;  i  vachanat,'  being  the  exposition  ; 
amnayasya,  of  the  Veda  ;  'pramanyam  ;'  since  that  statement  is  really 
proof  which  establishes  something  which  is  authoritative.  God  and 
the  quality  of  His  being  an  dpta  (?'.  e.,  a  great  and  good  person)  will 
lie  established  later  on. 

Now,  with  reference  to  what  has  been  said,  namely,  "  on  account 
of  the  faiilts  of  falsity,  contradiction,  and  repetition,"  there  in  the  case 
of  falsity,  the  explanation  lies  in  the  supposition  of  producing  result 
in  another  existence  or  the  supposition  of  defect  in  the  act,  the  agent, 
and  the  instrument,  since  there  is  the  rule  that  the  result  necessarily 
follows  from  an  act,  complete  in  all  its  parts,  prescribed  in  the  Veda. 
Moreover,  it  is  not  the  case  that  the  result  must  appear  in  this  and 
only  this  life,  as  in  the  case  of  Karlrl.  (i.  e.,  sacrifice  for  rain.j  There 
the  occupation  is  that  of  one  who  desires  a  revival  of  crops  which  are 
getting  dry.  In  the  case  of  the  sacrifice  for  a  son,  the  occupation  is 
that  of  one  who  desires  a  son  only.  This  is  the  difference.  There  is 
also  no  contradiction,  because  the  condemnatory  passages  such  as 
"  Syava  eats  up  his  oblations/'  etc.,  have  reference  only  to  cases  where 
after  having  particularly  vowTed  oblations  after  sunrise,  etc.,  one 
perfoms  such  homax  at  other  times.  Nor  is  there  the  fault  of  repetition r 
because  the  repetition  has  this  justification  that  eleven  mantras  for 
kindling  fire  having  been  as  a  matter  of  fact  recited,  fifteen  such 
mantras  as  required  by  the  text,  "  By  the  means  of  the  fifteen  word- 
thunders  he  opposed  that  enemy  who  is  here,"  cannot  be  obtained 
without  reciting  the  first  and  the  iast  mantra  for  three  times  each. — 3. 


g  VALSESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


Vivriti — Or  here  the  word  '  tat  '  itself  denotes  Isvara,  on  the 
strength  of  the  saying  :  "  Om,  Tat,  Sat — this  has  been  remembered  to 
be  the  three-fold  reference  to  Brahman." 

Knowledge  of  Predicables  is  the    meana  of  attaining  tJic  Supreme  Good. 


Dharinma-visesa-prasiitat,   Produced   by    a  particular 
f%^^T*T^m^f  Dravya-guna-karmma-samanya-vise.<a- 

samavuyanam,  of  Substance,  Attribute,  Action,  Genus,  Species,  and  Com 
bination.  I^T^TI*?  Padarthanam,  of  the  padarthas  or  predicables.  tfl^WjIf- 
^Trqfcqj  Sadharnmiya-vaidharmmyabhyam,  By  means  of  resemblance  and 
difference.  fl^RTTin^  Tattvajnanat,  From  knowledge  of  the  essence.  ft:^q^^ 
Nihsreyasam,  The  Supreme  Good. 

4.  The  Supreme  Good  (results)  from  the  knowledge,  pro 
duced  by  a  particular  dharma,  of  the  essence  of  the  Predicables, 
Substance,  Attribute,  Action,  Genus,  Species,  and  Combination, 
by  means  of  their  resemblances  and  differences.  —  4. 


ra.  —  Having  described  the  nature  and  characteristic  of  d/ianna  in  accordance 
with  the  desire  of  the  disciples,  he  lays  down  the  following  aphorism  for  ascertaining  tho 
subject-matter  and  the  "relation".  —  • 

Such  knowledge  of  the  essences  i*  dependent  upon  the  Vaiiesika, 
System  ;  therefore  it  goes  without  saying  that  it  too  is  a  source  of  tho 
Supreme  Good.  If,  through  its  derivation  in  an  instrumental  sense, 
namely,  that  the  essence  is  known  by  it,  the  word  '  tattvajiiana  '  refers 
to  the  treatise,  then  it  will  not  have  apposition  to  the  word'  dharma-yisesa- 
prasutat.'  In  '  dravya-gnna,  etc.,  the  compound  is  a  '  copulative  com 
pound  '  wherein  all  the  words  are  prominent,  because  the  knowledge  of 
the  essence  of  all  the  I'redicables  is  the  source  of  the  Supreme  Good. 

Now,  here  the  i  relation  '  is  understood  to  be  :  between  the  Doctrine 
and  the  Supreme  Good,  that  of  the  means  and  the  end  or  motive  ;  bet 
ween  the  Doctrine  and  the  knowledge  of  the  essences,  that  of  form  and 
matter  ;  between  the  Supreme  Good  and  the  knowledge  of  the  essences, 
that  of  effect  and  cause  ;  between  the  Predicables,  Substance,  etc.,  and 
the  Doctrine,  that  of  the  demostrable  and  that  which  demonstrates. 
And  from  the  knowledge  of  these  relations,  those  who  seek  the  Supreme 
Good  apply  themselves  to  this  Doctrine,  and  those  who  desire  salvation 
apply  to  it  only  when  they  realize  that  the  sage  is  an  dpta  or  trust 
worthy  person. 

•;  Xilisreyasam  "  is  final  cessation  of  pain  ;  and  the  tinality  of  the 
cessation  of  pain  consists  in  its  noa-simultaneonsness  with  the  antece 
dent  non-existence  of  pain  in  the  same  substratum,  or  in  its  simultan- 
eonsness,  in  the  same  substratum,  with  the  simultaneous  annihilations 
"of  the  special  attributes  of  the  Soul,  viz.,  adristam  and  saniskara.  Or, 
Salvation  is  the  antecedent  lion-existence  of  pain  upto  the  moment  of 
the  annihilation,  without  leaving  any  trace,  of  these  special  attributes. 


KANADA  SUTRAS  I,  1,4. 


A7c/«s  — '•  Antecedent  non-existenos":     Non-existenoe  is  fourfold,  viz. 

(a)  antecsdent,  e.g.  of  the  pot  before  it  is  produced. 

(b)  enasrgent,  e.g.  of  the  pot  after  it  is  destroyed. 

(c)  reciprocal,  e.y.  of  the  characteristic  of  the  pjt   in  a  picture  and  vice  versa. 

(d)  absolute,  e.g.  of  the  pot  in  a  room  where  there  is  no  pot. 

It  will  be  noticed  that  antecedent  non-existence  has  no  beginning  ;  emergent  non-existence 
las  no  end  ;  and  reciprocal  non-3xistenc3  and  absolute  non-existence  have  neither  be<'inriin  ' 
ior  end. 

The  tuing  of  which  there  is  non-existence,  is  said  to  be  the  opposite  or  counter-opposite 
pratiyogt)  of  that  non-sxistence.  In  the  abovo  illustration  the  counter-opposite  is  the  pot. 

One  kind  of  non-sxistence  (e.g.  of  the  pot)  is  differentiated  from  another  kind  of  non- 
jxistence  (e.g.  of  the  picture),  by  means  of  the  characteristics  of  their  counter-opposites. 
fhese  characteristics  are  therefore  called  determinants  or  differentiators  (avachchhedaka). 

Now,  mere  cessation  of  pain  is  not  Salvation  ;  because  there  remains  the  po.ssibilitv  of 
aain  in  future  and  there  remains  also  the  memory  of  the  pain  that  has  then  passed  into  non- 
)eing.  The  cause  of  the  possibility  of  pain  is  adrlstam  or  karma  (merit  and  demerit)  • 
ind  the  cause  of  the  memory  of  pain  is  samiMra,  (the  imprint  of  the  experience  of  pain  left 
n  the  soul).  Salvation  will  result  only  when  there  is  not  merely  the  cessation  of  the  pain 
ictually  experienced,  but  also  the  neutralisation  of  the  causes  of  possible  pain  viz,  adristant 
ind  sainsk&ra. 

Not  that  it  is  not  an  object  of  volition,  being  incapable  of  achieve 
ment,  because  even  antecedent  non-existence  can  be  brought  about  by 
the  neutralisation  of  the  cause.  Nor  does  it  thereby  lose  in  the  charac 
teristic  of  being  antecedent  non-existence,  because  such  characteristic 
remains  as  the  characteristic  of  the  non-existence  of  the  producer  of 
the  opposite  (i.e.,  the  existence  of  pain)  ;  and  to  be  the  producer  is 
merely  its  essential  or  general  fitness  to  be  the  cause.  Again,  antece 
dent  non-existence  is  not  the  last  member  or  element,  so  that,  it  existing, 
the  effect  must  necessarily  appear  ;  for  if  it  were  so,  then  it  would  follow 
that  an  effect  also  has  no  beginning.  Thus,  as  in  the  absence  of  a 
contributory  cause  it  did  not  produce  the  effect  so  long,  so  also  in  future 
it  will  not  produce  it  without  the  co-operation  of  a  contributory  cause 
the  person  operating  to  the  eradication  of  the  cause.  Therefore  this 
aphorism  too  upholds  antecedent  non-existence.  Hence  in  the  second 
aphorism  of  Gautama,  "  Pain,  birth,  activity,  faults,  and  false  notion— 
on  the  successive  removal  of  these  in  turn,  there  is  the  removal  of  the  one 
next  preceding  and  thereafter  salvation,"  (Nyaya  Sutram,  1,  i,  2),  the 
statement  of  the  non-existence  of  the  effect  on  the  non-existence  of  the 
cause,  strengthens  the  idea  of  salvation  as  having  the  form  of  the  antece 
dent  non-existence  of  pain.  Removal  of  activity  on  the  removal  of  faults 
removal  of  birth  on  the  removal  of  activity,  of  pain  on  the  removal  of 
birth — here  removal  does  not  mean  annihilation  but  non-production,  and 
that  is  nothing  but  antecedent  non-existence.  It  is  not  that  the  opposite  is 
lot  known,  for  the  opposite  is  surely  known  in  the  form  of  pain  in  general. 
As  in  the  case  of  propitiation,  there  too  only  the  non-production  of  pain 
is  expected  through  the  annihilation  of  faults.  In  the  world  also  it  is 
seen  that  the  removal  of  the  snake,  thorn,  etc. is  for  the  purpose  of  the 
non-production  of  pain.  So  the  activity  of  the  wise  is  directed  only 
Cowards  removing  the  causes  of  pain. 

Some  however  say  :  "  Only  the  absolute  non-existence  of  pain  is. 
lalvation.  If  it  is  not  seated  in  the  Soul,  yet,  as  seated  in  the  stone, 
etc.,  it  is  connected  with  the  Soul  ;  and  its  connection  lies  in  the 
annihilation  of  pain  which  does  not  accompany  the  prior  non-existence 
(or  potential  existence)  of  pain  ;  as  it  is  found  in  connection  with  such 
annihilation  of  pain,  seeing  that  such  annihilation  taking  place,  there 
arises  the  consciousness  of  the  absolute  non-existence  of  pain  in  that 


10  VAI&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

j.Iace.  This  being  so,  such  texts  of  the  Veda  as  "  He  moves  about  being 
absolutely  relieved  of  pain/'  also  become  explained."  We  reply  that 
it  is  not  so.  Absolute  non-existence  of  pain,  being  incapable  of  accom 
plishment,  is  not  an  object  of  voluntary  activity.  Nor  has  annihilatio  i 
of  pain  any  connection  to  that,  since  this  would  entail  a  techni 
cality. 

tfote. — Absolute  non-existence  has  neither  beginning  nor  end.  It  does  not  therefore 
depend  upon  human  will  or  effort.  Hence  it  cannot  bo  pursued  as  an  object  of  desire.  You 
inav  say  that,  as  long  as  it  is  not  accomplished  in  the  Soul,  as  the  connection  of  that  which 
is  not  connected  with  it, — such  connection  taking  the  form  of  the  annihilation  of  pain  which 
does  not  coexist  with  the  antecedent  non-existence  of  pain — so  long  surely  it  is  an  object  of 
dei-ire.  But  to  this  also  there  is  an  objection  ;  viz.,  that  the  annihilation  of  pain  does  not 
form  such  a  connection,  as  it  is  not  co-extensive  with  the  soul.  To  hold  otherwise,  w^uld  be 
to  i  ut  a  new  interpretation  upon  the  word  "  connection  "  (Sambandha). 

The  text  of  the  Areda  "  He  moves  about  being  absolutely 
relieved  of  pain  "  implies  that,  by  way  of  the  neutralization  of  causes,, 
prior  non-existence  of  pain  may  be  reduced  into  a  condition  similar  t<> 
that  of  the  absolute  non-existence  of  pain. 

It  may  be  said,  "  This  is  not  an  object  of  the  will,  as  it  is 
not  an  object  of  desire  which  is  not  subject  to  another  desire,  because  those 
only  who  seek  pleasure,  become  active  in  the  removal  of  pain,  seeing 
that  pleasure  is  not  produced  at  the  time  oi  pain."  But  this  is  not  so  ; 
because  it  is  equally  easy  to  say  the  contrary  also.  Will  not  desire 
for  pleasure  also  be  subject  to  the  desire  for  the  absence  of  pain  V  seeing 
that  men  overwhelmed  with  grief  as  well  as  those  who  turn  their  fa?es 
away  from  pleasure,  having  in  view  only  the  absence  of  pain,  are 
inclined  to  swallowing  poison,  hanging  themselves,  etc.. 

Neither  can  it  be    said,    "  Even  if    it    is  an    object    of    the    will,    it 
is  so  only  because  it  is  an  object  of  cognition.     But  salvation  as  absence 
of    pain    is   not  even  an  object  of  cognition.     Otherwise    (/.<-.  if  to  be  an 
object  of  cognition  were  Lot  a  nece.-sary  coi  clition  of  being  an  object  of 
the  will)  men  would  be  inclined  to  bring  about  the  state  of  swoon,  etc."  For 
that  which  is  capable  of  being  known  from  the  Veda    and    by    inference- 
cannot  be  reasonably  said  to  be  unknowable.     For  there    are    the    texts. 
of  the  Veda:     "  He  moves  about  being  absolutely  relieved  of  pain,"  "By 
knowing  Him  only  one  transcends  death/'  etc.      There  is  inference  also  : 
The    series    of    pain    is    finally    or   absolutely  rooted  out,  because  it  is  a 
series  like  a  series  of  lamps  ;  and  so  on.     It  can  be  known  by  perception 
also,  since  final  annihilation  of  pain  for  a  moment    becomes  the  subject- 
matter  of  thought  in    the   realization    of   pain    in    consciousness    (in   the 
moment   prior  to  death)    and  (if  you  do  not  admit  this),  also  because  the 
yoyins  perceive  the  future    annihilation  of  pain  by    virtue  of    the    power 
born  of  concentration   (i/w/a). 

It    cannot    be    said,  "  Still,  the  loss    and  gain    being    the     same,    it 
is  not    the  object  of  the  will,  sii  ce  with    pain,    pleasure  is  also  removed, 
the  removel  of    both  being  due    t.    the    ^  ame    set     of    causes"  ;  for    men 
naturally  dispassionate  and  fearful    oi    dark  days  of  suffering  and  who 
overestimate    every    glow-worm    of  j  leasure,  are  active  to  that  end. 

]t  cani.ot  again  be  said,  "  Cessation  of  pain  is  still  not 
the  object  of  the  will;  becai'se  cessation  of  ]  ain  which  is  yet  to 
come,  is  inrj  cssib.e,  \  ain  v^hich  is  j  att  is  in  the  past,  and  pain  which  is 
piesent  will  ctase  even  without  an  eifcrt  of  the  j  erson";  for  the  activity 
of  the  j erson  is  towards  the  eradication  of  causes,  as  in  j  e^unces.  Thus.r 


KANADA  StiTRAS  I,  1,  4. 


false  knowledge  attended  with  desire,  is  the  cause  of  Samsdra,'i.e.f 
.succession  of  mortal  existences  ;  it  is  rooted  out  by  the  knowledge  of  the 
truth  about  the  Self  ;  and  knowledge  of  the  truth  about  the  Self  is 
producible  by  the  practice  of  Yoya  ;  he.  ice  activity  in  this  direction  is 
justified. 

It  cannot  be  said  that  only  the  manifestation  of  permanent  pleasure 
is  salvation,  and  not  the  absence  of  pain  ;  for  there  is  no  proof  that 
j)leasure  can  be  permanent  ;  if  there  were  such  proof  the  i  the  maniies- 
-tation  of  pleasure  being  constant,  there  would  be  no  difference  between 
A  worldly  and  an  other-worldly  or  liberated  man,  aid  also  manifesta 
tion  being  a  product  or  effect,  on  its  termination  there  wjll  again  follow 
or  stream  of  mortal  existence. 


It  cannot  be  said  that  salvation  consists  in  the  laya  or  disappearance 
of  the  Jivdtmd  or  embodied  Self  into  the  Brahmdtmd  or  un  -embodied  or 
universal  Self  ;  for  if  laya  means  amalgamation,  then  there  is  an 
obstacle,  as  two  do  not  become  one.  It  cannot  be  explained  that  laya 
means  the  removal  of  the  subtle  embodiment  composed  of  the  senses  and 
of  the  physical  organism  ;  for  hereby  the  absence  of  the  causes  of  pain 
being  imolied,  it  follows  that  the  absence  of  pain  alone  is  salvation. 

Hereby  the  doctrine  of  the  Ekadandins  (a  sect  who  carry  staffs  con 
sisting  of  single  sticks)  that  salvation  means  the  remaining  of  the  pure 
Self  after  the  cessation  of  Nescience  or  false  knowledge  and  that  Self  is 
by  nature  true  knowledge  and  happiness,  is  also  refuted,  because  there 
is  no  evidence  that  the  Self  is  knowledge  and  happiness.  The  text  of  the 
Veda  u  Brahman  is  eternal,  knowledge,  and  bliss,"  is  no  evidence, 
because  it  proves  possession  of  knowledge  and  possession  of  bliss.  For  we 
have  the  perceptions  "  I  know,"  and  "  I  am  happy,"  but  not  the  percep 
tions  "I  am  knowledge  "  and  "  I  am  happiness."  Moreover,  Brahman 
being  even  now  existent,  it  would  follow  that  there  is  no  distinc 
tion  between  a  liberated  and  a  worldly  man.  The  cessation  of  Avidya 
or  false  knowledge  is  also  not  an  object  of  the  will.  Brahman  also,  being 
eternal,  is  not  a  xddhya  or  what  has  to  be  accomplished.  The  realization 
of  Brahman  within  the  Self,  having  Him  as  the  object,  is  not  a  sddhya  or 
what  has  to  be  accomplished.  Similarly  bliss  also,  having  Him  as  its 
essence  or  object,  is  not  a  sddhya.  For  these  reasons  activity  directed 
towards  Him  is  not  justified. 

It  cannot  be  said  that  salvation  lies  in  the  purity  or  unimpeded  flow 
of  the  stream  of  consciousness.  For  if  by  purity  is  meant  the  removal 
of  such  impediments  as  pain,  etc.,  then  this  much  alone  being  the  object 
of  the  will,  there  is  no  reason  for  or  proof  of  the  survival  of  the  stream 
of  consciousness.  Moreover,  the  retention  or  survival  of  the  stream  of 
•consciousness  can  be  possible  only  by  means  of  the  body,  etc.,  and 
hence  in  this  view  the  retention  of  samsdra  or  the  stream  of  mortal 
existence  also  would  be  necessary. 

It  is  therefore  proved  that  cessation  of  pain  as  described  above  is 
alone  the  Supreme  Good. 

In  '  knowledge  of  the  essence  '  the  genitive  has  been  used  in  the 
place  of  the  accusative.  The  third  case-ending  i  n  Sadharmmya-Vaid- 
harminya-bhyam'  shows  the  mode  (of  knowledge).  (K  these  'Sadharmmya  ' 
means  recurrent  property  and  '  Vaidharmmya  ',  divergent  property. 


12  VAI&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

Although  a  property  which  is  recurrent  in  one  place  is  divergent  in 
another,  and  vice  versa,  still  knowledge  in  the  shape  of  recurrent  and 
divergent  properties,  is  here  intended. 

Here  the  enumeration  itself  of  the  Predicables,  Substance,  etc.,  has. 
come  to  be  their  division,  which  has  the  effect  of  excluding  a  more  or 
less  number.  Therefore  it  follows  that  as  a  rule  Predicables  are  o  ;1  • 
sir  in  number.  And  this  is  not  proved.  If  any  other  Predicable 
which  requires  to  be  excluded  is  known  then  the  rule  does  not  stand 
good  ;  if  it  is  not  known,  then  the  exclusion  is  invalid.  It  cannot  be- 
said  that  this  is  not  the  exclusion  of  the  addition  of  something  else 
but  the  exclusion  of  non-application  ;  in  other  words,  that  the  non- 
application  of  the  characteristics  of  the  six  to  all  predicables  or  things 
is  excluded.  For  all  known  predicables  having  been  included  bv  the 
word  i  Predicable/  there  is  here  then  the  fault  of  proving  over  a  train 
and  also  that  something  else  is  not  known.  Moreover,  which  is  to  be- 
excluded,  non-application  of  the  characteristics  jointly  or  their  non- 
application  severally  '?  In  the  first  alternative,  joint  non-application 
prevails  everywhere,  so  that  there  can  be  no  exclusion.  It  cannot  be- 
said  that  in  the  £econd  alternative  also  there  can  be  no  exclusion  as 
with  reference  to  one  another  their  individual  non-application  prevails 
everywhere  ;  for  the  purpose  of  the  rule  is  to  exclude  the  non-applica 
tion  of  the  characteristics  of  the  six,  wThen,  according  to  others,  thev 
do  not  apply  to  Energy,  Number,  Similarity,  and  other  Predicables 
recognised  by  them.  Therefore  the  meaning  of  the  rule  that  Predic 
ables  are  only  six  in  number  .is  that  in  all  perceptible  objects,  there  in 
application  of  one  or  other  of  the  characteristics  of  the  six,  and  not 
that  there  is  non-application.  Now,  '  only/ if  it  goes  with  the  noun,  it 
means  exclusion  of  the  addition  of  something  else  ;  if  it  goes  with  the 
adjective,  it  means  exclusion  of  non-application  ;  and  if  it  goes  with  the- 
verb,  it  means  exclusion  of  absolute  non-application.  Here  according 
to  some  "  only"  has  all  this  three-fold  significance;  while  others  say 
that  its  force  lies  in  mere  exclusion  and  that  non-application,  addition 
of  something  else,  etc.,  are  things  to  be  excluded,  which  are  derived  by 
association. 

:i  Produced  by  a  particular  dhanna''  is  the  adjective  of  "  knowledge 
of  the  essence."  Here  "  particular  (Uiarma"  means  piety  characterised 
by  forbearance  or  withdrawal  from  the  world.  If  by  "  tattvajnuna" 
explained  as  "by  this  essence  is  known."  the  treatise  (i.e.,  the 
Aphorisms  of  Kanada)  is  meant,  in  that  case  it  should  be  said  that 
"  particular  dharma"  means  the  grace  of  a.,d  appointment  from  God, 
for  it  is  heard  that  the  great  sage  Kanada  composed  this  System  by 
obtaining  the  grace  of  and  appointment  from  God.  In  the  aphorism 
by  "  knowledge  of  the  essence"  the  realization  of  the  truth  about  the 
Self  in  the  understanding  is  i;;to",ded.  because  such  relization  alone 
is  competent  to  root  out  false  knowledge  attended  with  desire.  "  By 
knowing  Him  only  one  transcends  death,  no  other  road  is  known 
(vidyate)  for  travelling,"  "  Two  Brahmans  have  to  be  known  (veditavye)" 
"Having  no  eyes  He  yet  sees,  etc."— in  all  these  passages  the  word 
vedana  has  the  sense  of  realization  in  the  understanding,  and  the  use 
of  the  fifth  case-ending  in  the  causal  sense  in  the  word  l  tattvajiiAnat' 
indicates  that  such  realization  of  the  Self  comes  in  the  progressive' 


KANADA  SttTRAS  I,  1,  4.  IS 


career  of  hearing  from  the    Sdstras,    thinking    within    oneself,    medita 
tion,  etc., — 4. 

Vivriti. — '  Dharmmavi&esaprasutat'  means  producded  by  a  parti 
cular  (go  )d  conduct,  virtue  or)  merit,  acquired  in  this  life  or  in  previous- 
births.  It  is  the  qualification  of  '  tattvajnanat'  (knowledge  of  essence). 
As  pointed  out  by  the  author  of  Muktavali,  '  Sadharmmya'  means 
common  property,  and  i  Vaidharmmya'  means  opposing  (i.  e.f  dis 
tinguishing)  propei'ty.  The  use  of  the  third  case-ending  indicates 
ma:iner.  The  fifth  case-ending  in  *  tattvajnanat'  has  the  sense  of  appli 
cability.  Thus  the  meaning  is:  By  particular  virtue  knowledge  of 
essence  is  produced  by  means  of  the  generic  and  specific  properties  of 
the  Predicables,  Substance  and  others;  thereafter  is  produced  l  intellec 
tual  conception'  of  the  Self,  and  next  comes  the  realization  of  the  Self 
in  the  understanding  by  constant  meditation  ;  after  this  liberation 
follows  in  the  train  of  the  removal  of  false  knowledge,  etc-,  (Vide  Nyaya 
Sutram,  I.  i.  2.) 

The  author  of  the  Upaskara  has  however  said  :  The  word  'tattva- 
j liana'  in  the  aphorism  conveys  the  principal  idea  of  the  realization  of 
the  Self  in  the  understanding  ;  or,  if  it  is  interpreted  in  the  instrumental 
se:,se,  it  refers  to  the  treatise  which  is  the  (instrument  or)  means  of 
such  realization.  In  the  first  of  these  cases,  the  word  '  dharmmavisesa' 
will  mea  i  that  dharma  the  characteristic  of  which  is  forbearance 
(nivfitti)  ;  a.id  in  the  latter  case  it  will  mean  a  particular  virtue  or  merit 
in  the  form  of  the  grace  of  and  appointment  from  God,  according  to 
the  tradition  that  the  great  sage  Kanada  composed  this  treatise  under 
the  grace  and  appointment  of  God.  And  as  the  causal  use  of  the  fifth 
case-ending  bears  the  sense  of  applicability,  the  realization  of  the  Self 
in  the  understanding  will  follow  from  the  treatise  through  the  chain  of 
intellection,  constant  meditation,  and  soon,  for  the  word,  knowing  in  such 
texts  of  the  Veda  as  "  By  knowing  Him  only  one  transcends  death," 
"  Two  Brahmans  have  to  be  known,"  etc.,  denotes  realization  in  the 
understanding  (i.  e.,  spiritual  intuition),  and  alone  is  competent  to  root 
out  false  knowledge  together  writh  desires. 

This  should  be  considered.  If  the  word  '  tattvajiiana  '  in  the  apho 
rism  denotes  the  realization  of  one's  Self  in  the  understanding  which 
counteracts  false  knowledge  together  with  desires,  then  it  would  follow 
that  the  expression  '  by  means  of  generic  and  specific  properties  '  as  well 
as  the  term,  l  of  the  Predicables,'  bearing  the  sense  of  the  sixth  case- 
ending,  have  no  syntactical  connexion.  For  in  the  matter  of  the 
realization  of  the  Self  in  the  understanding  there  is  neither  the 
modality  of  the  ge  leric  and  specific  properties,  nor  the  materiality  or 
substantiveness  of  the  six  Predicables  ;  because  they  do  not  exist  there 
as  they  are  distinct  form  the  body,  etc.,  whereas  the  realization  of 
the  Self  in  the  understanding  is  only  competent  to  root  out  desires, 
etc.,  which  are  not  distinct  from  the  body,  etc.  It  cannot  be  said  that 
in  the  state  of  the  representation  of  separateness  from  the  other  (i.  e.t 
the  Not-Self)  in  the  Self  by  the  virtue  born  of  Yoga  (concentration"*' 
knowledge  of  the  six  Predicables,  namely  Substance,  etc.,  by  means  of 
their  generic  and  specific  properties,  is  also  produced  through  their  tem 
porary  contiguity,  inasmuch  as  the  subject-matter  of  such  knowledge 


14  VAISESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

(i.  e.  the  Predicates,  etc.)  appears  there  for  the  time  being.  For 
notwithstanding  that  such  representation  contains  such  indifferent 
generic  property,  etc.,  within  itaelf,  since  it  is  not  necessary  for  the 
real  purpose  in  view,  the  description  of  it  by  the  revered  Sfge  will 
mean  so  much  mad  talk  on  his  part. 


the  venerable  author  of  the  Upaskara  has  brought  forward 
the  texts  "'By  knowing  Him  alone,  etc.  "  as  being  evidence  that  the 
realization  of  the  Self  in  the  understanding  is  the  cause  of  liberation. 
That  too  has  been  improper.  For  the  Supreme  Self  alone  being  implied 
by  the  text,  "  I  know  Him,  the  Great  Person,  of  the  colour  of  the  Sun, 
beyond  the  'reach  of  darkness,  "  the  word  '  tat  '  (that)  has  reference  to 
the  Supreme  Self,  and  therefore  it  cannot  refer  to  the  Jivdtmd  (Subordi 
nate  or  Embodied  Self)  which  has  not  been  so  implied.  So  much  for  the 
sake  of  brevity. 

Here  the  enumeration-  of  six  Predicables  has  been  made  under  the 
view  of  Existence  or  Being.  In  fact  Non-Existence  or  Non  -Being  also 
lias  been  intended  by  the  sage  to  be  another  Predicable.  Hence  there 
is  no  impropriety  either  in  the  aphorism  "  Non-existence  of  effect,  fnuu 
non-existence  of  cause  "  (I.  ii.  1)  of  the  second  chapter  or  in  sn  -h 
aphorisms  as  "  From  non-existence  of  qualification  by  Action  and 
Attribute"  (IX-  i-  1;  of  the  Ninth  Book.  Accordingly  in  the  j\Tyaya- 
Llldvati.  it  has  been  said  :  "  Non-existence  also  should  be  stated  as  con 
ducive  to  the  Supreme  Good,  like  the  modifications  of  Existence.  This 
ronduciveness  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  the  non-existence  of  the  effect 
follows  from  the  non-existence  of  the  cause  in  all  cases.  In  the 
Dravyakirandeali  also,  Nyaya  teachers  have  admitted  that  Xoa- 
Existence  is  the  seventh  Predicable,  in  the  passage  ending  thus  :  "  And 
these  Predicables  have  been  mentioned  as  being  the  principal  ones. 
Non-Existence,  however,  although  it  possesses  a  ^  form  of  its  own,  has 
not  been  mentioned,  not  that  it  is  something  negligible,  but  because  its 
.ascertainment  is  dependent  upon  the  ascertainment  of  its  opposite." 
Thus  the  knowledge  of  the  generic  and  specific  properties  of  the  seven 
(iiiid  not  six  only)  Predicables  is  conducive  to  the  Supreme  Good  ;  and 
that  conduciveness,  it  should  be  observed,  lies  in  the  mode  of  knowledge 
of  marks  (liiiga),  etc.,  in  the  matter  of  the  establishment  of  separatenesa 
from  the  Not-Self  in  the  Self. 

The  Supreme  Good,  according  to  the  views  of  thy  Nyaya,  Vais^sika, 
and  Sankhya  philosophies,  consists'  in  the  permaie.it  cessation  of  pain, 
and  results  as  the  annihilation  of  pain,  which  is  not  synchronous  with 
pain  co-existent  with  itself.  In  fact,  annihilation  of  ultimate  pain  is 
non-synchronus  with  pain  co-existent  with  itself,  since  no  pain  can  at 
that  moment  arise  in  the  liberated  Soul.  With  a  section  of  the  NyAya 
thinkers,  salvation  means  permanent  cessation  of  demerit  only,  because, 
in  their  view,  this  only  can  be  directly  accomplished  by  the  realization 
of  the  Self  in  the  understanding,  as  the  Veda  says,  "  And  his  actions 
wear  off  when  he  sees  that  High-and-Low  (Mundaka  2,  2,  8)."  In  the 
opinion  of  the  one-staffed  Vedantin,  salvation  lies  in  the  cessation  of 
nescience,  and  nessience  is  (with  him)  a  different  Predicable.  In  the  opi 
nion  of  the  three  -staffed  Veda  itin,  salvation  means  the  disappearance  of 
the  Embodied  or  finite  Self  i  i  the  Great  Self,  aid  results  as  the  cessation 


KANADA  stTTRAS  I,  1,  4. 


of  the  Upddlii  or  external  condition  of  the  J-lua  (Embodied  Soul),  and 
of  the  causal  body.  Causal  body  again  has  been  proved  to  be  "the 
organic  combination  of  the  five  life-breaths,  mind,  understanding,  and 
ten  senses,  arisii'g  from  the  elements  which  have  not  been  compounded 
(i.  e.j  redintegrated),  possessing  subtle  limbs,  and  being  the  means  of 
experience  (i.  *.,  &/MM/O)".  The  Bhattas  however  say  that  salvation 
consists  in  the  manifestation  of  eternal  happiness,  and  that  eternal 
happiness,  though  evidenced  by  the  Veda  and  penetrating  all  living  beirgs 
6/iea*),  is  unmanifest  in  the  state  of  transmigration  (Samsdra*),  and 
becomes  manifest  to  the  sense,  immediately  after  the  realization  of  the 
truth  about  the  Self  in  the  understanding.  The  possible  defects  in 
these  views  are  not  shown  here  for  fear  of  increasing  the  volume  of  the 
book.  Bnt  in  all  the  views  the  permanent  cessation  of  pain  in  the  state 
of  salvation  remains  uncontradicted.  And  that  is  our  point. 

Now,  it  may  be  contended,  "  There  are  additional   Predicables    such 
as    Ei.ergy,  Similarity,    etc.     How    else  can  it    be    explained  that  in  the 
vicinity  of  the  jewel,  etc.,  burning  is  not  caused  by     that    which    causes 
burning-  an d    is    caused    when    it  is  not    in    the    vicinity  V     Therefoieit 
must  be  imagined  that  the    jewel,  etc.,    counteract    the    burning    ei.ergy 
of     that     which  causes  burns,  and    that  the    inciting    removal  of    them 
revivifies  it.     In   like     manner,    Similarity    also  is    a    different     Predic- 
able.      For  it  does  not  fall  within  the  six  forms  of  existence,  as  it  equally 
applies  to  them    all,    since    such    similarity    as    in    "As    bovine-ness    is 
eternal,  so  also  is  horseness,"    is  perceived.     Nor  is    it     a  non-existence, 
as  it  appears    in    the    form    of    an    existence."     But    our    reply    is    that 
reconciliation  being  possible  by    the  mere  suppostion  of  the  self-activity 
of  fire,  etc.,     existing  away  from  the  jewel,   etc.,    or    the    supposition    of 
the  absence,  etc.,  of  jewel,  as  the  cause    of  burning,  etc.,  it  is  not  proper 
to  imagine  infinite  Energy,  its  prior  non-existence,  and  its  annihilation. 
It  should  not  be  asked  again  how  there  can  be  burning   even  in  the  close 
presence    of    apowerful    jewel,     because  that  supposition   has  been  made 
only  of  the  absence  of  jewels  in  genaral,  which  are  powerful  but  remote. 
In  the    same  way, Similarity     alsu     is    not     -A,    different    Predicable,    but 
denotes  that,  while  one  thing  is  quite  distinct    from    another    thing,  the 
one  possesses  the  majority  or  the  chief    of    the    attributes    belonging  to 
the  other  ;  as  the   Similarity   of  the    moon  in  the    face,    means    that    the 
face  which  is  quite  distinct  from    the  moon,  possesses    the    cheerfulness, 
and  other  attributes  belonging  to  the  moon.     This  in  brief. 

Chandrakdnta.  (1)  Dharma  presents  two  aspects,  that  is,  under 
the  characteristic  of  Pravr-itti  or  wordly  activity,  and  the  characteris 
tic  of  A'icritti  or  withdrawal  from  wordly  activity.  Of  these,  Dharma r 
characterised  by  Xicrittl,  brings  forth  tattva-jndna  or  knowledge  of 
truths,  by  means  of  removal  of  sins  and  other  blemishes. 

(2)  Here  the  separate  enumeration  of  Sdmdnya,  etc.,  is  unneces 
sary,  on  account  of  their  non-divergence;  for,  tidnidnya,  etc.,  falling,  as 
they  do,  within  Substance,  etc.,  do  not  differ  from  the  latter.  Their 
separate  mention,  however,  is  justified  en  the  possibility  of  difference 
in*  the  mode  of  treatment  adopted  by  the  author.  Systems,  differing 
in  their  methods,  are  taught  for  the  benefit  of  embodied  souls,  differing 
irom  one  another.  This  is,  then,  the  Vaisesika  System,  of  which  the 
distinctive  features  are  /Sdmdnya,  etc.,  as  are,  in  the  other  (Nydya\ 


VAI£ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


System,  Doubt,  etc.,  although  they  are    included  in    the    Proof    and    the 
Provable,    respectively.     Accordingly,    this     System  is  enabled  to  stand 
apart  by  mens  of  Sdmdnya  and   the  other  Predicables;  and  so  it  is  called 
the    Vaiseiiika     System.     Otherwise    it    would    be    merely     an     Upanitsat 
teaching  Adhydtma-vidyd,  Philosophy  of  the  Embodied    Self.    *  *  *  *  * 
4Samanyam'    means    possession  of    similarity.     *  *  *     Doubt    and  Error 
arise    from    (observation     of)    Sdmdnyam    and    from   non-observation  of 
Visesa  (or  distinctive)    peculiarity.     Observing  the  common    properties, 
altitude  and  extension,  of  a  pillar  and  a  person,  and  remaining  ignorant 
of  their  differentia,  one    feels    the    doubt    whether    it    be    a    pillar    or    a 
person  ;    error    also    arises  in  this  way  :  observing  the  common  property 
only  and  in  consequence  of  fault    or  imperfection,    one  mistakes  a  pillar 
for  a  person  or  a  mother  of  pearl  for  a  piece  of  silver.     False  cognition, 
again,  is  the  root  of  all  suffering.     It  is  for  this  reason  that  '  Samfinyam' 
has  been  separately     mentioned,  notwithstanding    that  it  is  included    in 
Substance,  etc.     '  Visesa'  is  that  by  which  a  thing  is.    reduced    to    itself. 
False  cognition  which    springs    from    (observation  of  only)    the  common 
property  is  corrected  by  the  observation     of    the    distinctive    property  : 
whence  arises  correct    knowledge,  which  is  called    tattva-jndnam.     *  *  * 
For  this  reason  '  Visesa'  is  separately  mentioned,  although  it  is  included 
in  Substance,  etc.     If,  again,  it  is  a  single  reality  that,  being  determined 
in     particuiar     ways,     comes    to    be  used  as  '  Samanyam'  and  '  Visesa,' 
then  it  falls  within     (the  class    ofj    Attributes.     Or,    if    these    are    mere 
technical  names,  then  they  are  not  additional  Predicables.     '  Samavaya' 
means     complete     approximation,  *.  e.,    ^identification  ;    as  it  has     been 
said,    '  Samavaya'  is      inseparable    existence.     *  *  *     '  Samavaya'  is  a:i 
attribute,  which  is  the  counter-opposite  of  Separateness,  either  character 
ised  as  pluarlity  or  characterised  as  difference    in  kind.     It    inheres    in 
Substance,  and  does  not    possess  Attribute;    nor  is  it  a  form  of    Action. 
Now,    birth  means    a  particular   conjunction  (of  the  Self)  with  the  body, 
the  senses,  and  the  feelings.     Thereafter     the    Jiva    errs     that  the     Self 
has  no    separate    existence  from    the  body,  etc.,  in  consequence  of  which 
a  person  transmigrates  and    suffers  a    multitude    of    pains,    and    on    the 
cessation  of    which    he  is    liberated,  the    stream  of  his    sufferings    being 
dried    up.     Hence    '  Samavaya',      though    included    in     Attributes,    is 
separately  mentioned. 

(3)  There  are  other  Predicables  also,  viz.,  pramdna,  Proof ; 
prameya,  Provable ;  xamsaya,  Doubt;  prayojana,  Purpose;  dristaiita, 
Instance;  siddhflnta,  Tenet  ;  avayava,  Member  (of  a  syllogism);  tarka, 
Confutation  (or  Reasoning)  ;  nirnaya,  Ascertainment  ;  vdda,  Discussion  ; 
jalpa,  Wrangling;  vitandd,  Cavilling;  hetvdbhdaa,  Fallacy;  c.hhala, 
Equivocation  ;  jdti,  Showing  the  futility  of  the  mark  of  inference  ;  and 
nigraha-sthdna,  Ground  of  Defeat  or  Opponent's  Error.  These  too  come 
under  the  Predicables  of  Kandda. 

(4)  The  Supreme  Good  results  from  knowledge  of  truth  about  the 
Self,  etc.,  while  knowledge  of  truth  about  the  rest  is  auxiliary  to  it. 
False  knowledge  about  the  Self,  etc.,  is  of  various  kinds,  e.y.,  the 
sense  of  Non-Ego  in  the  Ego,  the  sense  of  Ego  in  the  Non-Ego. 

Enumeration  of  Substances, 
fjpaskdra. — Because  as  the  souljit  participates  in  salvation  and    is  the  support  of   all    the 


KANADA  SUTRAS  I,  1,  5.  17 


Predicablei.  therefore  he    now    says    by   way  of    giving   the  division  and  particular  reference 
nf  the  lirst  mentioned  Predicable,  .Substance. 


lit  in  *  ii 

Prithivi,  earth,  wq:  Apas,  waters.  3*1:  Tejas,  fire.  srnj:  Vuyuh, 
.air.     3117131     Akasam,    Ether.     *I$:     Kulah,    time,     f^  Dik,    direction, 

space.     *JT?*Tl  Atma,  Self.  J?H:  Manas,  mind,  ffo  Iti,  only.  5»Qlfqf  Dravyani, 

substances. 

5.     Earth,  Water,  Fire,  Air,  Ether,   Time,    Space,    Self,    and 
Mind  (are)  the  only  Substances. — 5. 

•Iti'  has  tha  sense  of  determination.  Thereby  the  meaning  is  that 
Substances  are  nine  only,  neither  more  nor  less.  If  it  is  doubted  that 
the  exclusion  of  a  greater  or  less  number  having  been  secured  by  the 
force  of  the  division  itself,  there  was  no  need  for  the  word. '  iti/  then 
it  should  be  understood  that  it  being  possible  to  take  the  aphorism  in 
•A  merely  denotative,  indicatory  or  enumerative  sense,  the  word  '  Iti'  is 
used  to  indicate  that  it  has  the  object  of  division  also,  and  that  the 
word  is  used  also  to  indicate  that  gold,  etc.,  as  well  as  God  are  included 
in  them,  a. id  also  that  Darkness  which  may  be  apprehended  to  be  an 
additional  substance  is  a  non-being.  The  fact  that  the  words  have  not 
bee  i  compounded  goes  to  show  that  they  are  all  equally  prominent. 
And  the  author  of  the  aphorisms  himself  will  point  out  their  definitions 
•or  differentia;  while  treating  of  i  difference.' 

It  cannot  be  said  that  gold  is    neither  Earth  as  it  has    no  smell,  nor 
Water  as  it  has  no  wetness  and  natural  fluidity,  nor  Fire  as  it  has  weight 
and  on  the  last  account,  nor  Air,  nor  again    Time,  etc.  ;    therefore    it    is 
•something    over    and    above    the  nine.     For,  in  the  first  two  cases,  there 
can  be  no  comparison  ;  in  the  third  case,  that    which    has    to  be    proved 
is    something  imaginary    (i.  c.,    that    gold    is    not    a    transformation    of 
Fire).      After  that  there  has  been    analogous  argument,    although    there 
is    no  doubt    about  that    which    has  to  be    proved,  and  also  the  mark  of 
inference  is  fallacious.     He  will  prove    afterwards  that  gold  is    a  trans 
formation  of  fire — 5. 


Firfiii.  —  It  may  be  objected,  "  The  writer  of  the  Kandali  and  the 
Samkhya  teachers  have  held  that  Darkness  is  a  Substance.  And  it  is 
right.  For  otherwise  how  can  people  have  the  perception  of  quality 
and  action  in  it,-  viz.,  'Dark  Darkness  moves'  ?  Now,  being  devoid  of 
Smell,  Darkness  is  not  Earth  ;  as  it  possess  dark  colour  it  cannot  be 
included  in  Water,  etc.  Therefore  how  is  it  right  to  say  that  the  sub 
stances  are  nine  only  ?"  We  reply,  •'  It  is  not  so,  because  it  is  illogical 
to  imagine  another  Substance,  when  it  can  be  produced  by  the  a'bsence 
of  necessary  Light.  The  perception  of  dark  colour  is,  like  the  percep 
tion  of  the  vault  of  heaven,  erroneous.  The  perception  of  movement 
is  also  an  error,  occasioned  by  the  departure  of  light,  as  the  perception 
of  movement  by  the  passengers  of  a  boat  in  respect  of  the  trees,  etc., 
standing  on  the  bank  of  the  river,  is  occasioned  by  the  movement  of 
the  boat,  etc.  The  supposition  that  Darkness  is  a  substance  will  entail 


ls  VAlfcSlKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


the  supposition  of  tlie  antecedent  non-existe.x-e  and  annihilation  of  a-i 
infinite  number  of  its  parts.  Lii  the  opinion  of  the  \\riter  of  the  Kandali 
Darkness  is  included  in  Uarth.  So  that  according  To  him  there  is  no 
impropriety  in  the  exclusion  of  a  greater  nninlier." 

Among  these  nine  divisions  of  Substance.  Kther,  Time,  anil  Spacedo- 
n  ot  form  anv  class,  since  they  have  only  a  single  individual  existence. 
hut  the  rest  form  classes. 

Clta-uJrakflnta.  The  separate  mention  of  Time  and  Space  is  inten 
ded  to  indicate  the  difference  in  the  uses  of  these  terms  according-  to 
the  difference  of  the  effects.  Akdsa,  though  it  is  one.  still  admits  of  a 
variety  of  names  and  uses,  according  to  the  difference  of  effect.  It  is 
not  that  Time  and  Space  are  essentially  different  objects  from  Akdsn, 
Kther. 

rut  ion  of  Attributes. 


I.  '•iiiixk'i  m  .  —  He-  gives  the  enumeration  and  division  of  Attributes  immodiately  aflei" 
nub-ttinco,  because  Attributes  as  such  reside  in  all  substancos  which  become  their  Mib-Urate, 
»i-e  manifested  by  substances,  and  themselves  also  manifest  substances. 


* 


Uiijia-rasa-gaiullia-spai-si'th.  Colour.  Ta>te.  Smell  .  and 
Touch.  ^f^qT:  Saiuklivah,  Numbers.  ^nnji^  Parimanatii,  Measures.  K.\ten- 
sioiis.  ^qsFr3fFr  Prithaktvam,  Separate,  iess.  ^TqtJTfear^  Samyoga-vibhagau, 
Conjunction  "an'd  Disjunction.  qc??riq<^  1'arat  vAj.arat  ve.  Priority  and 
Posteriority.  f^T.  Hndiihayah.  Understandings.  §«3J:^  Sukha-duhkhe. 
Pleasure  and  pain.  f^T^qt  Lchcliha-dvesau,  Desire  ;i:id  Aversio:i 
1'raatnah,  Volitions.  ^  Cha.  And.  Jjmi:  (rnuAh.  Attributes. 


6.  Atrributes  are  Colour,  Taste,  Smell,  and  Touch,  Num 
bers,  Measures,  Separateness,  Conjunction  and  Disjunction, 
Priority  and  Posteriority,  Understandings,  Pleasure-  and  Pain, 
Desire  and  Aversion,  and  Volitions.  —  6. 

The  word  •  cha  '  gathers  up  Weight,  fluidity.  Liquidity,  Impression, 
Virtue,  Vico  and  Sound  ;  they  are  well-known  Attributes,  it  is  hence 
that  they  have  not  been  verbally  stated.  Their  attribute;!  ess,  he  will, 
in  their"  proper  places,  explain  with  respect  to  their  nature  and  maik. 
The  words  Colour,  Taste,  Smell,  and  Touch  are  compounded  into  a, 
tim.iaxa  in  -order  to  show  that  they  do  not  co-exist  with  contemporaneous! 
Colour,  Taste,  Smell,  and  Touch.  But  Numbers  a<id  Measures  are  not 
so  compounded  and  are  stated  in  the  plural  number,  to  show  that  they 
co-exist  with  contemporaneous  Numbers  and  Measures.  Although  that 
which  co-exists  with,  unity  is  not  another  unity  or  that  which  co-exist* 
with  largeness  or  length  not  another  largeness  or  length,  still  there  is- 
in  fact  co-existence  of  duality,  etc..  amongst  themselves  and:  also  of 
largeness,  length,  etc.,  with  largeness,  length,  etc.,  of  a  different  kind. 
Although  separateness  is  cu-existent  with  the  separatenes  of  Two,  etc., 
and  therefore  should  Le  specified  in  the  plural,  like  numbers,  still  us 


KANADA  SUTRAS  I.  1,  7-  19 


specification  in  the  singular  goes  to  indicate  its  difference  from 
Numbers,  namely,  to  be  known  or  shown  by  its  limits.  Conjunction 
and  Disjunction  are  stated  i  u  the  dual  number  to  show  that  both  of  them 
are  the  effects  of  one  and  the  same  act.  Priority  and  Posteriority  are 
slated  in  the  dual  number  to  show  that  they  are  to  be  known  in  relation 
lo  eacli  other  and  tluit  they  are  equally  marks  of  Space  and  Time.  The 
plural  i.umber  in  'understandings'  indicates  the  refutation  of  the  theory 
of  one  and  only  one  understanding  held  by  the  Samkhya  thinkers,  ou  the 
ground  of  its  division  into  knowledge,  etc.  The  dual  number  in 
Pleasure  and  Pain  is  intended  to  point  out  that  both  of  them  are  causes 
of  one  elTejt  which  is  distinguished  as  experience  (bhoya)  and  that  they 
are  equally  instrumental  to  the  inference  of  adristam,  and  also  that 
•even  Pleasure  resolves  into  Pain.  The  dual  number  in  Desire  and 
Aversion  indicates  that  both  of  them  are  causes  of  Activity.  The  plural 
in  Volitions  is  meant  to  show  that  ten  kinds  of  volitions  which  comprise 
both  permitted  and  prohibited  acts,  are  causes  of  Virtue  and  that  ten 
other  kinds  are  causes  of  Vice. 

Or,  Colour,  Taste,  Smell,  and  Touch  have  been  shown  in  a  va-nni#<t, 
form  to  teach  that  they  are  the  means  of  the  disposition  of  the  elemental 
senses  or  sense-organs  or  to  establish  the  operation  or  changes  due  to 
heat.  Number  is  mentioned  in  the  plural  number  to  indicate  a  refuta 
tion  of  this  that  there  is  a  contrariety  in  numbers,  such  as  dualitv, 
plurality,  etc.  Separateness  is  separately  mentioned  to  indicate  that  it 
is  aUo  plural  on  account  of  the  plurality  of  Numbers,  and  also  that  its 
difference  from  Numbers  lies  in  its  being  revealed  by  the  knowledge  of 
limits.  In  Measures  or  Exteasions  the  plural  number  is  meant  ta 
remove  the  contradiction  of  length,  shortness,  etc.  The  dual  number  in. 
Conjunction  and  Disjunction  points  out  their  mutual  opposition. 
Priontv  and  Posteriority  are  mentioned  also  in  the  dual  number  lest 
it  might  be  doubted  that  the  division  of  Attributes  is  too  narrow, 
because  Priority  and  Posteriority  may  be  four-fold  by  the  possibility 
of  their  being  different  in  kind  by  their  difference  as  relating  to 
»Spa<-e  and  as  relating  to  Time- 

He  will  give  their  definition  as  he  proceeds.  —  (j. 
Enumeration  <>f  Actions. 

L'jtaxMra.  —  Actions    become    the   object  of   the  sense    by  reason  of   their  production  by 

-Substances  ami  Attributes  as  well    as  of   their  Combination    with    Substances  having    colour. 

Therefore,  immediately    after    the    statement  of    Substances  and    Attributes,  he  states    the 
•enumeration  and  division  of  Actions. 


Utksepanam,  throwing  upwards,  313  qf  (WTO  Avaksepanam, 
throwing  downwards.  Sllf^^  Akunchanam,  coutraction.flHTOlW  PrasAra- 
uam,  expansion.  Jio^  G-amanam,  going,  motion,  ffa  Iti,  namely.  ^*tJM 
Karrninani,  action  ~? 

7.     Throwing    upwards,    Throwing    downwards,    Contraction 
Expansion,  and  Motion  are  Actions.  —  7. 


20  VAI&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


Throwing  upwards,  Throwing,  downwards.  Contraction,  Expansion. 
and  Motion  are  Actions.  'Iti'  has  the  force  of  determination,  as. 
.Rotation  etc,  are  included  in  Motion.  Here  then  there  are  five  'classes' 
directly  pervaded  by  Action-ness,  namely,  the  quality  of  throwino 
upwards,  the  quality  of  throwing  downwards,  the  quality  of  contraction. 
the  quality  of  expansion,  and  the  quality  of  motion  (or  throwiug- 
up  ward-ness  ,tlir  owing-down  ward-ness,  con  tract  ion -ness,  expansion-ness,, 
and  motion-ness). 

Well,  Imt  this  is  disproved  by  the  fact  that  Motion  is  a  synonym  of 
Action,  because  the  consciousness  of  Going  is  experienced  in  all  cases. 
The  foiir  classes,  throwiug-upward-ness,  etc,  which  have  the  co-exten 
sion  or  common  field  of  the  absolute  non-existence  of  each  in  the  others.. 
are  not  known  to  be  co-existent;  therefore  the  classes  pervaded  by 
Action-ness  are  only  four.  (To  this  objection  we  reply):  It  is  tine  that 
Motion  is  another  name  for  Action.  But  it  is  separately  mentioned  with 
the  object  of  collecting  under  one  word  Rotation,  Evacuation, 
Percolation,  Flaming  upward,  Bending,  Uplifting,  etc;  which  produce 
different  states  of  consciousness  and  are  known  by  different  names.  Or 
Going-ness  also  is  really  a  fifth  class  pervaded  by  Action-ness.  80 
that  the  application  of  Motion  to  Rotation,  Evacuation,  etc  ..  alone  is 
primary  and  if  there  is  the  application  of  Going  to  throwing  upwards, 
throwing  downwards,  etc.,  then  it  is  secondary  or  analogous.  The 
common  property  of  the  primary  and  analogous  instances  is  only  this 
that  they  are  the  non-combinative  causes  (/.  /.'.,  conditions)  of  Conjunc 
tion  with  and  Disjunction  from  constantly  changing  places  a  .•<]. 
^directions,  and  this  belongs  to  Rotation  and  others,  so  that  by  the 
inclusion  of  Going  these  too  have  been  included. 

The  states  of  egress,  ingress,  etc.  however,  are  not  classes  ;  for.  in 
respect  of  one  and  the  same  Action,  c.  <j.,  a  person  going  from  one  room 
to  another,  one  observer  will  have  the  consciousness,  'he  enters'  ;  while 
another,  'he  comes  out'  ;  and  thus  there  will  result  an  intermixture  of 
classes.  So  also  in  the  case  of  Rotation,  etc.,  on  entering  one  water 
course  after  corning  out  by  another,  there  will  arise  two  states  of 
consciousness,  '  lie  comes  out'  and  'he  enters'  ;  therefore  these  should  br 
resolved  into  relativity  in  general. 

In  the  case  of  throwing  upwards,  etc.,  however,  the  action  of 
throwing  upwards  is  caused  in  the  hand  by  the  volition  produced  by 
the  desire  '  I  throw  up  the  pestle,'  through  the  non-combiuative  cause  of 
conjunction  with  the  soul  exercising  volition  ;  then  from  the  non-combi 
native  cause  of  motion  in  the  hand  thrown  up,  there  appears  the  action 
of  throwing  upwards  in  the  pestle  also  ;  or,  these  two  actions  take  place- 
simultaneously.  Then  through  the  conjunction  of  the  soul  exercising^ 
volition  produced  by  the  desire  to  throw  down  the  hand  and  pestle 
which  have  been  thrown  up,  and  also  through  the  motion  of  the  hand 
there  is  produced  in  the  hand  and  the  pestle  simultaneously  the  action 
of  throwing  downwards  favourable  to  tha  fall  of  the  pestle  within  the 
mortar.  Then  towards  the  sudden  going  upwards  of  the  pestle  after 
conjunction  with  a  harder  substance,  neither  desire  nor  volition  is  the* 
cause,  but  the  springing  up  of  the  pestle  is  due  only  to  Re-action  ;  and 
this  is  only  going  and  not  throwing  upwards  ;  the  application  of 
throwing  upwards  to  it  is  only  secondary.  Similarly  is  the  application 


K  ^NADA  SftTRAS  I.  1,  8  21 


of  the  name  of  Throwing  upwards  to  two  bodies  of  Air  as  well  as  to 
grass,  cotton,  etc.,  carried  by  them,  going  upwards  by  the  force  of 
"the  collision  of  two  bodies  of  Air  flowing  in  opposite  directions.  So 
also  iu  the  case  of  the  going  up  of  water  under  the  collision  of  two 
currents.  Thus  the  usa  of  throwing  npwrards  and  throwing  downwards 
is  primary,  only  in  the  case  of  the  body,  its  limbs  and  pestles,  clubs,  etc. 
in  contact  with  them  ;  for  there  are  such  perceptions  as  he  throws  up 
the  pestle,  he  throws  up  the  club  ;  as  also,  he  throws  down. 

Contraction  is  action  which  produoes  flexion  in  cloth  and  other 
things  made  up  of  parts  and  non-initial  conjunctions  of  parts  among- 
themselves  even  while  there  exist  the  initial  conjunctions  of  those 
parts  ;  whence  arise  such  perceptions  as  the  lotus  contracts,  the  cloth 
contracts,  the  leather  contracts.  Similarly,  Expansion  is  action 
destructive  of  the  non-initial  conjunctions  already  produced,  of  parts  ; 
whence  arise  such  perceptions  as  the  cloth  expands,  the  leather  expands, 
the  lotus  expands.  Actions  which  are  different  from  these  four  are 
forms  of  Going.  Therein  Rotation  is  action,  favorable  to  oblique 
conjunctions,  appearing  in  the  hand,  from  conjunction  with  soul 
exercising  volition,  and  in  the  wheel,  etc.,  from  revolving  and  from 
conjunction  called  nodana  (molecular  motion^  with  the  hand  possessing 
Action.  Evacuation,  etc.,  should  be  similarly  explained.  He  will  also 
make  them  clear  as  he  proceeds. 

Now  it  should  be  understood  that  in  the  case  of  prescribed 
sacrifices,  baths,  gifts,  etc.,  these  Actions  are  the  products  of  conjunc 
tion  with  the  soul  exercising  volition  favourable  towards  the  production 
of  Virtue  ;  and  in  the  case  of  going  to  a  forbidden  place,  slaughter. 
eating-  tobacco,  etc.,  they  are  the  products  of  conjunction  with  the  soul 
exercising  volition  tending  towards  the  production  of  Vice.  —  7 

Resemblances  of  Quittance,  Attribute,  and  Action. 

L'  i><txkdra.  —  After  the  enumeration  of  Substance,  etc,,  he  begins  the  topic  of  the  Resem 
blance  of  tl.e  three.  He  states  the  Resemblance  of  the  three  even  before  the  enumeration  of 
the  other  three  Predicables,  Genus,  etc.,  inasmuch  as  it  is  expected  first  of  all  i  by  the  disciples, 
because  the  Resemblance  of  the  three,  Substance,  etc.,  is  favourable  to  the  knowledge  of 
reality. 


?Tc£  Sat,  existent.  ^factf  Anityam,  non-eternal,  ^sq^  Dravyavat,  con 
taining  substance.  mtii  Karyyam,  effect.  q>miin  Kuranam.  cause.  5T*n?qf7- 
33^^  Sfnnunya-visesavat,  being  both  Genus  and  Species.  ff<r  Iti,  this. 
jfsqcjqpfrttfUTiH  Dravya-guiia-karmmanam,  of  Substance,  Attribute,  and 
Action.  3rfr3r<i:  Avisesah,  resemblance. 


8.  The  Resemblance  of  Substance,  Attribute,  and  Action 
lies  in  this  that  they  are  existent  and  non-eternal,  have  Substance 
as  their  combinative  cause,  are  effect  as  well  as  cause,  and  are 
both  Genus  and  Species.—  8. 

In  the  presence  of  the  word  l  visesa  '  the  word  l  avisesa  '  denote* 
Resemblance.  'Sat  '  connotes  the  quality  of  being  the  object  of  the  per- 


22  V  A1SKS1K  A  PHI  LOSOPH  Y 


ception  and  r.aino  in  1  he  form  of  that  which  is  existent,  Because  a]]  the 
three  have  fitness  for  existence.  •  Anityam  '  connotes  the  qual-ty  of  that 
which  tends  towards  annihilation.  Although  it  is  not  common  to  the 
ultimate  atoms,  etc.,  still  it  is  inte  ided  to  denote  the  possession  of  the 
uptldhi  or  condition  which  distinguishes  predicables  having  the  function 
or  nature  of  that  which  tends  towards  annihilation.  •  Dravyavat  ' 
moiins  that  which  contains  substance  as  its  combinative  cause.  This 
too  is  not  present  in  the  ultimate  atoms,  etc.  Therefore  the  intention  is 
to  denote  the  possession  of  the  /t/>d<l]it.  or  condition  which  distinguishes 
predicables  having  the  function  of  that  which  contains  substance  as  its 
combinative  cause.  •  Karyyam  '  is  intended  to  denote  the  possession  of 
the  upddhl  or  condition  which  distinguishes  predicates  having  the 
Junction  of  that  which  is  the  counter-opposite  of  antecedent  non-e.xis- 
tence  (or  potential  existence).  '  Karanam  '  indicates  the  ])ossession  of 
the  npddhi.  or  condition  which  distinguishes  predicables  having  tlie 
function  of  that  which  belongs  to  the  class  of  constant  (Mill's  invariable 
and  unconditional)  antecedents  of  all  effects  except  knowledge.  Thus 
the  definition  is  not  too  wide  so  as  to  include  the  Soul  which  is  the 
object  of  Self-intuition,  as  a  cause  of  Self-intuition,  or  to  extend 
to  the  generic  quality  of  being  a  cow,  etc  ;  nor  is  it  too  narrow 
so  as  to  exclude  the  ultimate  atoms  (///,  perfect  spheres)  which  are  not, 
causes.  '  Samanayavisesavat,'  means  the  possession  of  those  charac 
teristics  which  though  they  are  genera,  still  are  species  inasmuch  as 
they  serve  to  differentiate  themselves  severally,  <•.</.,  Substance,  iess, 
Attributeness,  Actionness,  etc.  It  cannot  be  said  that  causality  is  too 
wide,  because  from  "  (rive  a  cow."  "  A  cow  should  not  be  touched  with 
the  feet  "  and  other  texts  of  the  Veda  it  appears  that  class  or  kind 
,  snfa)  also  is  a  cause  of  virtue  and  vice  ;  for  a  class  has  the  sole  use  of 
limitation. 

This  aphorism  is  illustrative.  It  should  be  observed  that  the 
Resemblance  of  the  three  lies  also  in  their  being  capable  of  being 
denoted  by  words  having  the  meaning  inherent  in  them. 

If  it  is  said  that  the  characteristics  of  being  effects  and  non-eternal  ity 
belong  to  those  only  which  have  causes,  and  that  this  is  their  Resem 
blance  as  laid  down  by  Professor  Prasastadeva  in  "  And  causality  (ap 
pears)  elsewhere  than  in  the  perfect  spheres  (ultimate  atoms).''  1  he;) 
according  to  the  aphorism  it  cannot  be  specified  by  the  possession  of  the 
upddhi  or  condition  which  distinguishes  predicables. 

The  characteristics  of  being  the  causes  of  Attributes  and  also  the 
•effects  of  Attributes  belong  to  the  three  except  the  eternal  Subs- 
tan  ces.  —  8. 

Rc*<")u-ldain-<>  »f  Snhtttancv  and  Attribute. 

I'p'i-fkilra.  —  He  now  points  out  the  Resemblance  of  Substance  and  Attribute  only. 


:  Drayya-guiiayoh,  of  Substance  and  Attribute    ?HIT?riflt  « 
Sajatiyarainbhakatvam,  the  characteristic    of    being    the    originator    of 
•congeners.  *n^**4  Sadharmmyam,  Resemblance. 

9.     The    Resemblance     of    Substance    and    Attribute  is   the 
characteristic  of  being  the  originators  of  their,  congeners.-  9. 


KANALM  SUTHAS  1.  1.11.  ^ 


Ke  ai  tkes  clear  this  very  aphorism  in  the  following-  one.  —  '.'. 
Ij.i-nlii  nation  <>f  the  foregoing  apl«  rixtn  . 


Dravyuni,  Substances.  5«H?a*  Dravyautarani,  another  Subs 
tance.  ^ST*"*^  Arabhante.  originate.  J]HJT:  Cnnuli.  Attributes.  ^  Cha. 
and.  »mn?<UH  Guimntaram,  another  Attribute. 

10.     Substances  originate  another    Substance,     and    Attributes 
another  Attribute,—  10. 

r»asi'«ra.—  The  Resemblance  in  respect  of  the  characteristic  of  being  the  originators  of 
c-i"  -cncrs  should  l>o  understood  or  observed  with  the  exclusion  of  universal  Substances  composed 
of  final  parts,  the  Attributes  of  what  are  composed  of  final  parts,  and  also  the  Attributes  of 
Duality,  the  Separateness  of  Duals,  Priority,  Posteriority,  etc.  Or  the  author  means  to 
indicate  the  possession  of  the  njM'lhi  or  condition  which  distinguishes  predicables  having  the 
function  of  that  which  originates  its  congener,  whereby  Substances  and  individuals  which  an 
no'.  causes,  arc  also  included.  —  10. 

Actions  do  not  originate  Action*. 

l~t,  „.</.-,',,•„.  __  But  it  may  he  asked;  Why  do    not    Actions    originate    other  Actions  ?     So  lit, 


as  : 


IH  Itl  «  II 

^w|    Karmma,actio...     zff^N    Karmmasadhyam,     j. 
action.  ?T  Na,  not.  f^?T^  Vidyate,  is  known. 

11.     Action,    producible  by  Action,  is  not  known.  —11. 

Here  the  root  '  vid  '  has  the  sense  of  knowledge,  and  not  existence. 
The  meaning  is  that  there  is  no  proof  of  the  existence  of  Action  which 
is  producible  by  Action,  as  in  the  case  of  Substance  and  Attribute- 
originated  by  their  congeners. 

Here  the  idea  is  this:  If  Action  is  to  produce  Action,  then  it  will. 
like  Sound,  produce  it  immediately  after  its  own  production.  Therefore 
Disjunction  from  substances  in  Conjunction  having  been  completely 
caused  bv  the  first  Action  itself,  fuoin  what  will  the  second  Action  cause 
Disjunction?  For  Disjunction  must  be  preceded  by  Conjunction,  and 
u  uew  Conjunction  has  not  also  been  produced  in  the  subject  m  question. 
Hut  the  definition  of  Action  suffers  if  there  is  non-production  of  Disjunc 
tion.  It  cannot  be  said  that  a  new  Action  will  be  produced  at  another 
moment;  because  a  patency  cannot  be  delayed  and  because  there  is 
nothing  to-  be  waited  for.  In  the  case  of  the  production  (of  Conjunc 
tion)  at  the  very  moment  of  the  destruction  of  the  previous  Conjunction, 
the  production  of  Disjunction  (by  Action)  will  be  surely  not  proved. 
The  same  also  will  be  the  result  in  the  case  of  its  production  of  the 
subsequent  Conjunction.  And  after  the  subsequent  Conjunction  there 
is  really  destruction  of  Action.  Therefore  it  has  been  well 
Action  'producible  by  Action  is  not  known.  —  11. 

Difference  of  Substance  from     Attribute  and  Act'u  n. 
l',..:  <:•,->-:>.—  He  mentions  the  Difference  of  Substance  from  Attribute  »nd  Aotiou  : 


24  VAI&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


ll  ?  i  ?i  ?  R  ii 


sf  Na,  not.     £3*1  Dravyara,  substance.     Tl^  Karyyam,    effect. 
TCaranam,  cause.     *g  Cha,  and.     ^%  Badhati,  opposes  ;  annihilates. 

12.  Substance    is    not  annihilated    either    by    effect    or    by 
cause.  —  12. 

Substance  is  not  destroyed  either  by  its  own  effect  or  by  its  own 
cause.  The  meaning  is  that  the  relation  of  the  destroyer  and  the 
destroyed  does  not  exist  between  two  Substances  which  have  entered 
into  the  relation  of  effect  and  cause,  because,  (and  this  is  the  purport") 
Substance  is  destroyed  only  by  the  destruction  of  the  support  or 
substratum  and  the  destruction  of  the  originative  Conjunction. 

The  form  '  badhati  '  (instead  of  the  correct  from  '  hanti)  is  found 
in  aphorisms.  —  12. 

Above  continued. 

Vpaskdra.  —  He  says  that  Attributes  are  capable  of  being    destroyed    by    eMecl   ami  o-mise. 

^TUT  w  in  m  mi 

«<?q*JT  Ubhayatha,  in  both  ways,     nqjj:  (Junah,  attributes. 

13.  Attributes  (are    destroyed)  in  both  ways.  —  13 

The  meaning  is  (that  they  are)  capable  of  being  destroyed  by  effect 
as  well  as  by  cause.  The  initial  Sound,  etc.,  (in  a  series)  are  destroyed 
by  their  effects,  but  the  last  is  destroyed  by  its  cause,  for  the  last  but 
one  destroys  the  last.  —  13. 


:  —  An  attribute  sometimes  destroys  its  cause  (c.  j/.,  in 
chemical  compounds),  and  sometimes  does  not  destroy  it  (c.  <j.  in  physical 
•compounds  or  masses). 

Above  continued. 

Upanknra.—  After  stating  that  Attributes    arc  opposed   by  (and    so    cannot    coexist    M  ith> 
both  their  effects  and  causes,  he  mentions  the  opposition  of  effect  to  Action. 

II  ?  I  ?  I  ?8  || 


Karyva-virodhi,    whereof    the    effect    is    the    opposite    or 
contradictory.     «ffWj    Karmina,  action. 


14.     Action  is  opposed  by  its  effect.  —  14. 

Karyyavirodhi  '  is  Bahuvrlhi  or  adjective  compound  meaning 
that  of  which  the  opposite  is  effect,  because  Action  is  destructible  by- 
subsequent  Conjunction  produced  by  itself. 

The  non-opposition  of  effects  and  causes  is  uniform  in  the  case  of 
Substances  only.  But  it  is  not  the  rule  in  the  case  of  Attribute  and 
Action.  For  what  the  author  desires  to  say  is  that  those  Attributes 
destroy,  which  are  the  opposites  of  the  destruction  due  to  the  destruc 
tion  of  the  non-combinative  cause  of  the  destructio  i  of  the  sub 
stratum  —  14. 


KANADA  SUTRAS  I.  1,  15.  2$ 


Characteristics  of  /Substance. 

Upaskdra.  —  After  describing  the  Resemblance  of  the  ithroe   aooording  to  the   wish   of   th« 
disciples,  he  now  goes  on  to  state  their  marks. 


Kriyft-guna-vat,  possessing  Action  and  Attribute. 
Samavayi-karanam,     combinative    cause.    £faf  Iti,   such. 
Dravyalaksanaia,  mark  of  substance. 

15.     It  possesses    Action  and   Attribute,    it    is   a    combinative 
cause  —  such  (is)  the  mark  of  Substance.—  15. 

'  Kriyagunavat'  means  wherein  Actions  and  Attributes  exist.  The 
word  '  laksana,'  by  the  force  of  its  derivation,  viz.  <  By  this  it  is  marked 
out,'  denotes  a  mark  as  well  as  a  particular  differetiating  mark  or  sign 
which  divides  off  objects  of  like  and  unlike  kinds.  Therein  by  Action 
it  is  marked  out  that  this  is  a  substance.  And  by  the  possession  of  Attri 
butes,  Substance,  excluded  from  objects  of  like  and  unlike  kinds,  is  marked 
out.  Of  these  the  like  kinds,  *.  «.,  objects  which  resemble  one  another 
in  being  existent,  are  five,  viz.,  Attributes,  etc.  The  unlike  kind  how 
ever  is  Non-Existence.  Therefore  Substance  is  different  from  Attribute 
•etc.,  because  it  possess  Attribute.  That  which  is  not  different  from 
Attribute,  etc.,  does  not  possess  Attribiite,  e.y.,  Attribute,  etc.  Although 
the  possession  of  Attribute  is  not  found  in  a  substance  made  up  of  parts 
at  the  moment  of  its  origin,  still  the  possession  of  the  opposite  of  the 
absolute  non-existence  of  Attribute  is  meant  to  be  stated,  because  the 
antecedent  and  the  subsequent  non-existence  of  Attribute  are  also 
opposites  of  the  absolute  non-existence  of  Attribuse.  Similarly,  the 
being  the  combinative  cause  also,  which  divides  the  six  Predicables  i» 
a  mark  of  the  Predicable,  Substance. 

Here  the  Sddliya,  i.  e.,  that  which  has  to  be  proved,  does  not  suffer 
from  the  fault  of  being  unknown,  for  difference  from  Attribute,  etc.  is 
proved  by  perception  in  the  water-pot,  etc.  Nor  is  here  the  fault  '  of 
proving  that  which  has  been  already  proved,  for  although  the  difference 
of  the  water-pot  as  such  from  others  has  been  proved,  yet  such  difference 
remains  to  be  proved  in  respect  of  it  considered  as  a  Substance.  Some 
say  that  in  the  case  of  the  difference  of  that  which  defines  the  paksa 
{i.  <>..,  the  object  in  which  the  existence  of  the  Sddhya  is  sought  to  be 
proved,  e.  y.,  the  mountain  when  the  existence  of  fire  is  sought  to  be 
proved  in  it),  there  can  be  no  proving  of  that  which  has  already  been 
proved,  as,  for  instance,  in  "Word  and  Mind  are  eternal."  But  this  is  not 
so,  for  that  which  has  to  be  proved  being  proved  in  anything  whatever 
determined  by  that  'which  determines  the  characteristic  of  being  a 
paksa,  the  paksa  suffers  in  its  essential,  and  hence  that  which  has  to  be 
proved  in  such  cases,  must  be  proved  as  such,  i.  e.,  independntly. 

The  word  '  it,'  means  '  others',     Therefore  tha  possessoin  of  Number 
the  possession  of  Measure,  the  possession  of  Separateness,  the  possession* 
of  Conjunction,  and    the  possession    of    Disjunction     also    are    brought 
together.  —  15. 

Bhdsya  :  —  Although  the  soul  is    void  of    action,  i.  e.  change,   still    it 
appears   to    possess    action    by  the  action  of  the  mind  or  internal 


2>J 


VAISES1KA   PHILOSOPHY. 


of  souse,  in  the  state  of  its  phenomenal  existence;  and  hence   it  is    called 
a  Substance. 

Characteristics  of  Attribute. 

("paskdra.  —  Attributes  having  been  enumerated  after  Subatancast,  Be  gives  their  mark. 


1  $  i  W  II 


n.M,v.^.,     Dravyasrayi, 

not    possessing    Attribute. 

Iti, 


inhering  in    substance.     ^HUnf^     Agunavan, 
^  iif^*riT)!f  Samyoga-vibhugesu,  in    Conjunc- 
Akaranam,   not  a    cause,     ^p^fa:     Anape- 
h.        nuToTfmiT  ( i  n  Uri-laks:i,uam,    mark    of 


suc 


tions  and  Disjunctions. 
ksah,    independent.     ffa 
Attribute. 

16.  Inhering  in  Substance,  not  possessing  Attribute,  not  an/ 
independent  cause  in  Conjunctions  and  Disjunctions,-  such  is 
the  mark  of  Attribute.— 16. 

'  Dravyasrayi' means  that  of  which  the  nut  in  e    is  10  reside    in    Subs 
tance.     This     however    pervades     Substance     also.     Therefore    he    says 

*  AgunavAn'  or  Attributeless.     Still  it  over-exte.ids  to  Action;  so  he  adds 

*  not  a  cause  in  Conjunctions  and  Disjunctions.'     Yet  it.  does    noi  include 
Conjunction,  Disjunction,  Merit,  Demerit,    knowledge  of  Uod,  etc.;    so    he- 
adds  '  independent.'  After  i  independent,'  '  Attribute'  should  be  supplied. 
The  moaning  therefore  is  that  Attribute  is  that    which  is  not  an  indepen 
dent  cause  of  Conjunctions  and  Disjunctions.    Conjunctions  and  Disjunc 
tions,  etc.,  are  depended  upon  by  Conjunction  and  Disjunction.  Attribute- 
ness  is  the  characteristic  of  possessing  the  genus  pervaded    by  existence 
and  residing  in  the    eternals    with    .eternal    functions.     The    revealer    of 
Attributeness  is  the  causality  present  in  something  possessing  genus  and 
devoid  of  combinative  causality  and    non-combinative  causality  towards- 
Conjunction  and  Disjunction    combined.      Conjunction     and    Disjunction 
are  severally  caused  by     Conjunction    and  Disjunction,  but    not    jointly. 
Merit,      Demerit,      knowledge      of      (rod,      etc.,      have    been      included, 
because  they     are  only     occasional  or     conditional    causes     of  both     and 
are    not    their  combinative    causes    or    non-combinative    causes.      Or  tlu- 
revealer  of  Attributeness  is  the  characteristic,   co-extensive    with  genus.. 
of  being  devoid  of  combinative  and  non-combinative    causality    towards 
Conjunction    aifd   Disjunction.     Or  the  mark  of  Attribute  is  simply  t he- 
characteristic  of  not  possessing  Attribute  along  with   the   possession    of 
OVenus  and  of  difference  from  Action. — 16. 

Characteristics  of  Action. 

( '/'cttfA'i'/w.— —He  stateN  the  mark  of  Action  which  ha,<  been  mentioned  after  Attribute  : 


i  n 

l  iikadravyam,  resting  or  residing  in  one    substance  only. 
Agunam.  devoid  of  Attribute.  ^JfTTJ^r^ lJt§  Samyoga-vibhagesu,  in  Conjune- 


KANADA   SOTRAS  1,  1,18.  27 


-r.ions    and    Disjunctions.     SHWlfNUO"*    Anapeksa-karanam,    independent 
rause.     ^ftt    Tti,  su^h.     ^rof^r^qf    Karmma-laksanam,  Mark  of  Action. 

17.     Residing  in  one  Substance  only,  not  possessing    Attribute, 
an  independent  cause    of    Conjunctions    and    Disjunctions-  -such 

Ji>    4-Vi£»     t-rri  t-1.-    /~4T        A/'.J'H'^n 


is  the  mark  of  Action.  — 17. 


{  Ekadravyam  '  means  that  of  which  only  one  Substance  is  the  subs 
tratum.  *  Agunam  '  is  that  in  which  no  Attribute  exists.  '  Samyoga 
etc/  means  independent  of  something  in  the  form  of  positive  existence 
which  comes  to  appear  after  its  own  production;  so  that  it  is  not  unesta- 
blished  where  there  is  necessity  for  or  dependence  upon  the  combinative 
cause  and  also  where  there  is  dependence  upon  absence  of  antecedent 
conjunction.  Or  independence  of  that  which  has  its  production  after 
the  production  of  Action  itself,  is  meant,  because  the  annihilation  of 
the  antecedent  conjunction  also  has  its  production  after  the  production 
of  Action  itself,  and  because  as  a  non-existence  it  does  not  bear  relation 
to  its  first  moment. 

Action-ness  is  the  possession  of  the  genus  directly  pervaded  by 
existence  other  than  that  residing  in  the  eternals,  or  the  possession  of 
the  genus  determinative  of  the  uncommon  or  specific  causality  which 
produces  the  perception  that  someting  moves,  or  the  possession  of  the 
genus  residing  only  in  what  is  devoid  of  Attribute  and  not  being  an 
Attribute,  or  the  possession  of  the  genus  determinative  of  the  causality 
towards  Disjunction  present  at  the  moment  immediately  subsequent  to 
the  production  of  Action  itself. 

And  this  again  is  a  Predicable  evidenced  by  the  perception  that 
something  moves,  which  cannot  be  demonstrated  by  its  production,  etc., 
at  places  having  no  interval  between  each  other,  because  the  breaking 
up  of  a  moment  will  be  refuted  later  on. 

The  manner  in  which  the  mark  serves  to  distinguish  it  from  others 
is  the  same  as  has  been  already  described  —  17. 

Resemblance  of  Substance,  Attribute,  and  Action. 

Upaakdra.  —  Now  he  begins  the  topio  of  the   Resemblance  of  the   three  only   by   way   of 
their  cause  : 


3«l«mr^**iqrf  Dravya-gun.a-karmman.am,  Of  Substance,  Attribute,  and 
Action,  jfni  Dravyam,  Substance,  wraf  Karanam,  cause.  3wi?*i  Saman- 
yam,  Common,  Uniform. 

18.  Substance  is  the  one  and  the  same  cause  of  Substance, 
Attribute,  and  Action.  —  18. 

'  Samanyam  '  (common)  means  the  same  one,  as  in  -  These  two  have 
H  common  mother.'  The  meaning  is  that  Substance,  Attribute  and 
Action  exist  in  one  and  the  same  Substance  which  is  their  combinative 
cause. 


28  VAI&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY 


The  Resemblance  of  the  three  lies  in  the  possession  of  the  genus 
having  the  function  of  that  which  lias  Substance  as  its  combinapiv': 
cause  —  -18. 

Above  .continued. 

L'pasktira.  —  He  states  the  Resemblance  of  the  three  a.s   having   Attribute   a*   their   m»vi~ 
oombi  native  cause  : 

ii  t  m  *«.  u 

Tatha,  Similarly,     gq[:  Grunah,  Attribute. 

19.  Similarly  Attribute  (is  the  common  cause  of  Substance,. 
Attribute,  and  Action).  —  19 

The  Resemblance  of  the  three  lies  in  the  possession  of  the  genus- 
residing  in  that  which  has  Attribute  as  its  non-combinative  cause. 
Conjunction  is  the  non-combinative  cause  of  substance.  The  possession. 
as  their  non-combinative  cause,  of  Attributes  which  are  the  causes  of 
their  congeners,  belongs  to  the  Attributes  of  effects,  ev/.,  Colour,  Taste. 
Smell,  Touch,  Number,  Extension  or  Magnitude,  Separateness,  etc. 
The  Attributes  oi'  the  ulimate  atoms  of  Earth  have  Conjunction  with 
Fire  as  their  non-combinative  cause.  The  non-combinative  cause  of 
Actions,  however,  are  Fire  etc.,  internal  vibration,  impact,  weight. 
fluidity,  impression,  conjunction  with  soul  possessing  invisible  conse 
quences  of  Actions  (adristam),  conjunction  with  Soul  exercising  Volition. 
etc.  These  should  be  respectively  understood  by  the  reader.  Sometimes- 
even  one  Attribute  gives  rise  to  all  the  three  Substance,  Attribute 
and  Action  ;  for  instance.  Conjunction  with  a  ball  of  cotton  possessed 
of  Impetus,  produces  Action  in  another  ball  of  cotton,  originates  a 
Substance,  viz.,  an  aggregate  of  two  balls  of  cotton,  and  the  Exten 
sion  of  that  aggregate  also.  Sometimes  a  single  Attribute  originates 
a  Substance  and  an  Attribute  ;  <>.  [/.,  Conjunction  which  may  be- 
described  as  an  aggregation  independent  of  Impetus,  with  a  ball 
of  cotton  as  well  as  its  Extension.  —  19- 

Ithdsya  :  rcada  I.  i.  19,  as  Ubhayathd  ytindh  and,  inttrpretn  it  to 
mean  that  Attributes  sometimes  become  the  cause  of  Substance,  Attri 
bute,  and  Action,  and  sometimes  do  not. 

Effects  of  Action. 
Upaxkara.  —  He  bays  that  sometimes  a  single  Action  is  productive  of  a  multitude  of  effects  : 


I  ?  |  Ro  II 

SaEayoga-vibuga-veganam,    Ot"  Conjunction,  Disjunc 
tion,  and  Impetus.     tf  **l  Karmma,  Action.     53"*?!^  Saman  am,  Common. 


20.     Action  is  the    common  cause  of  Conjunction,  Disjunction^ 
and  Impetus.  —  20. 

The  word  '  karanam  '  should  be  supplied.     Producing    as    many  Dis 
junctions  as  the  number  of  Substances  in    conjunction  with    the    Subs- 


KANADA  stTTRAS  I,  1,22.  29 


stance  in  which  Action  is  produced,  it  (Action)  also  produces  an  equal 
number  of  Conjunctions  elsewhere.  And  the  same  Action  again  produce,* 
impetus  in  its  own  substratum. 

The  word  Impetus  indicates  Elasticity  also  —  20. 

Difference  beticeen  Substance  and  Action. 

Upaikdra.  —  But  it  may  be  argued  that  originative  Conjunction  having  bean  brought  about 
by  substance  possessed  of  Action  ;  the  substance  which  is  originated  thereby,  is  surely- 
produced  by  Action  since  Action  has  been  ita  antecedent  as  a  rule,(  Hence  he  says  : 


im  *  i  **  n 

JT    Na,    not.     a[5*nnjt     Dravyanam,     Of      Substances.     ^*4    Karmma 
Action. 

21.     Action  is  not  the  cause  of  Substances.  —  21. 
The  meaning  is  that  Action  is  not  the  cause  of  substances.  —  21. 

Above  continued. 
ara.  —  He  points  out  why  it  is  so  : 

n  ?  m  RR  n 


Vyatirekat,  because  of  cessation. 

22.     (Action  is  not   the   cause   of   Substance)    because   of   its 
cessation.  —  22. 

'  Vyatirekfit  '  means  on  account  of  cessation.  Substance  is  produc 
ed,  on  the  cessation  of  Action  by  the  ultimate  Conjunction  ;  therefore 
Action  is  not  the  cause  of  Substance.  Neither  is  Action  which  has  ceased 
to  exist,  a  cause  of  Substance.  Moreover  if  Action  be  such  a  cause,  it  must 
be  either  the  non-combinative  cause  of  Substance  or  its  conditional  cause. 
It  cannot  be  the  first,  because  then  it  will  follow  that  Substance  will  be 
destroyed,  even  on  the  destruction  of  the  Action  of  the  parts,  inasmuch 
as  Substance  is  capable  of  being  destroyed  by  the  destruction  of  the  non- 
combinative  cause.  Nor  can  it  be  the  second,  for  in  that  case  there  will 
be  a  violation  of  the  rule,  since  small  pieces  of  cloth  being  produced  just 
from  the  Conjunctions  still  existinig  after  the  destruction  of  a  large 
piece  of  cloth,  it  is  seen  that  even  parts  which  are  devoid  of  Action, 
originate  Substance.  —  22. 

fihdsya  reads  I,  i.  21  and  22  as  one  aphorism,  and  interprets  it 
thus  :  Action  does  not  become  the  immediate  cause  of  substances. 
"Why  V  In  consequence  of  its  cessation.  For,  when  a  Substance  be 
comes  what  it  is,  at  that  moment  cessation  of  Action  takes  place.  Action 
in  the  constituent  parts  of  a  Substance  ceases  on  conjunction,  and 
the  Substance  becomes  what  it  is.  Action,  therefore,  is  not  an 
immediate  cause  in  the  production  of  Substances.  What  the  author 
means  to  say  is,  as  the  expression  shows,  that  the  mediate  causalitv 
of  Action  in  the  production  of  Substance  is  not  refuted. 

Difference  between  Substance  and  Action. 

Upaskura.  —  ;HaA  ing  stated  that  one  may  be  the  originator  of    many,   he  .now   atates   th»t 
of  or.e  effect  there  may  be  many  originators  : 


80  V  A l&SSIK A  PHILOSOPHY. 


%&*  ^r^r  ^nrpj   (in  ?  i  ^  11 


j   Dravyanam,    of     many    substances.     Jfwf,   Dray  jam,  a  single 
aubstance.  VP'I,  karyyam,  effect.  JTJRT'tf,  Samanyamjcommon. 


23.     A  single  Substance  may  be   the   common  effect   of  more 
than  one  Substance.  —  23. 

Of  Substances,  i.e..  of  two  Substances  as  well  as  of  more  than  two 
Substances.  Thus  by  two  threads  a  piece  of  cloth  consisting  of  two 
threads  is  originated,  so  also  by  many  threads  one  piece  of  cloth  is 
originated  .  It  cannot  be  ;said;that  a  piece  of  cloth  consisting  of  one 
thread  is  seen  where  the  warp  and  woof  are  supplied  by  one  and  the 
same  thread,  for  owing  to  the  mtn-exi  stance  of  the  Conjunction  of  a 
single  object  there  is  no  non-combinative  cause  here.  Nor  again  can  it, 
be  said  that  the  Conjunction  ot  the  thread  and  the  iibres  is  the 
non-combinative  cause,  because  the  relation  of  such  parts  and  whole 
being  naturally  established  there  can  be  no  Conjunction  between  them,  also 
because  the  relation  of  that  which  is  to  be  originated  aad  the  originated 
is  not  perceived,  and  also  because  of  the  impenetrability  of  condensed 
bodies.  It  cannot  be  said  that  this  is  commonly  observed.  For  here,  as 
a  matter  of  fact,  cloth  is  produced  by  the  mutual  conjunction  of  many 
small  pieces  of  thread,  produced  on  the  destruction  of  a  long  thread  by 
the  impact  of  the  loom,  etc.,  whereas  from  the  nature  of  things  there 
arises  the  false  notion  of  unity  in  respect  of  threads  which  are  really 
many  in  number.  —  23. 

Abocn  continued 

Upaskdra.  —  -Well,  it  may  be  asked,  ae  a  single  Substance  is  the  effect  of  many  Substances, 
«a  also  a  single  Attribute  of  many  Attributes,  BO  is  a  single  Action  the  effect  of  many  Actions  ? 
Henoe  he  says  : 


«M-*i<uf  ^**T  II  t  I  f  I 


Ghina-vaidharmmyat,  on  account  of  the  difference  of 
Attributes,  f  Na,  Not.  qrofan,  Karrnmanam,  of  Actions.  IF»I?  Karmma, 
Action. 

24.     Action  is  not  the  joint  effect  of  many  Actions,  on  account 
of  the  difference  of  their  Attributes.  —  24. 

4  Karyyam  '  is  the  complement.  It  has  been  already  stated  that 
the  resemblance  of  Substance  and  Attribute  is  that  they  originate  their 
congeners-.  Also  it  has  been  already  denied  that  Actions  are  productive 
of  Action,  in  the  aphorism  "  Action  producible  by  Action  is  not  known" 
«(I.  i.  11).  This  is  here  repeated.  This  is  the  idea.—  24. 

Difference  between  Attribute  and  Action. 

Upaakdra.  —  Now,  pointing  out  that  Attributes  which  reside  in  aggregation  are  originated 
h\  many  Substances,  he  says  : 


i  n  3  ^  ii 

Dvit-va-prabhritayah,     Duality,    etc.      q^qi:     SaEtkhyAhT 


KANADA    StTTRAS  I,  1,26. 


Numbers.  S4^sqtnfa<*nm:   1'mhaktva-samyoga-vibhagah,   Separateces*. 
Conjunction,  and  Disjunction.     ^  Cha,  And. 

25.  Duality  and  other  Numbers,  Separateness,  Conjunction, 
and  Disjunction  (are  originated  by  more  than  one  Substance).-  -25. 

"  Originated  by  more  than  one  substance  "  —This  is  the  complement. 
The  word  Separateness  appearing  together  with  Duality,  etc.,  also 
denotes  Separateness  of  two,  etc.  Thus  Numbers  beginning  with  Duality 
and  ending  with  the  highest  arithmetical  figure,  Separateness  of  two, 
etc..  Conjunctions,  and  Disjunctions  are  originated  by  two  as  well  as  by 
mure  than  two  Substances.  So  that  the  characteristic  of  residing  in 
more  Substances  than  one  belongs  to  them.  And  this  characteristic- 
again  is  the  same  as  co-extension  with  the  mutual  non-existence  of 
combinative  causes.  —  25. 

Above  continued. 

I'uaxhii'u.  —  Well,  it  may  ba  asked,  as  Substances  which  are  made  up  of  parts,  as  welf 
»B  Attributes  already  mentioned,  have  the  characteristic  of  aggregation,  so  does  not  that 
characteristic  belong  to  Ac'  ions  a]«o  ?  So  he  says  : 


Asamavfxyat,  on  account  of    non-combination. 
S;Aunanya-karyyam,  common  effect,     ^ffl,  Karmma,  action,  f,  Na, 
"Vidyate,  is  known. 

2(j.  Action  which  is  the  joint  result  (of  an  aggregate  of  two 
or  more  substances,)  is  not  known,  as  it  is  not  found  in  combina 
tion  with  them.  —  26. 

'  On  account  of  non-combination  '  should  be  joined  with  '  in  two- 
substances/  and  '  in  more  than  two  substances/  Thus  a  single  Action 
does  not  combine  in  two  substances;  nor  does  a  single  Action  combine- 
in  more  than  two  substances  ;  so  that  Action  which  is  the  effect  of  an 
aggregate,  is  not  known.  Here  too  the  root  '  vid  '  in  '  vidyate  '  has  the 
sense  of  knowledge  and  does  not  denote  existence.  If  Action  resided  in 
aggregation,  then  one  substance  moving,  there  would  arise  the  consci 
ousness  '  It  moves/  in  respect  oi'  twro  substances  and  more  than  tw<» 
substances  ;  but  it  is  not  so  ;  therefore  Action  does  not  reside  in  aggre 
gation.  This  is  the  meaning. 

It  cannot  be  argued,  ''  The  Action  of  the  body  and  its  parts  art- 
certainly  originated  by  many  substances,  namely,  the  body  and  its  parts  ; 
otherwise,  the  body  moving,  how  can  there  be  the  consciousness,  '  It 
moves',  in  respect  of  the  hands,  feet,  etc.?  Similarly  in  the  case  of  other 
objects  made  up  of  parts."  For  such  consciousness  is  due  to  the  fact 
that  the  quantity  of  the  Action  of  the  parts  is  pervaded  by  the  quantity 
of  the  Action  of  the  whole  made  up  of  these  parts.  The  contrary  is  not 
the  case,  because  the  part  moving  there  does  not  arise  the  consciousness. 
4  It  moves,'  in  respect  of  the  entire  whole  made  up  of  the  parts.  Other 
wise  from  the  conjunction  of  cause  and  not-cause,  the  conjunction  of 
effect  and  not-effect  also  will  not  follow,  since  there  can  be  conjunction 
of  an  effect  also,  only  with  the  Action  of  the  cause.—  26 


32  VAI&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

Resemblance  of  Substance,  Attribute  and  Action. 
UpasMra,  —  He  again  mentions  a  single  effect  of  many  (causes)  : 


f,  SaAyoganam,  of  Conjunctions.  ?sqq,  Dravyam,  substance. 
27.     Substance  is  the  joint  effect  of  many    Conjunctions.  --27. 

The  meaning  is  that  substance  is  the  single  effect  of  many  Conjunc 
tions.  It  should  be  observed  that  here  '  Conjunctions'  should  be  taken 
to  the  exclusion  of  the  conjunctions  of  touch-less  substances,  substances 
made  up  of  final  parts  or  ultimate  formations,  and  heterogeneous  sub 

stances.  —  27. 

Above  continued. 

Cpaskdra.  _  Now  he  says  that  many  Attributes   produce  one  Attribute  as  their  effect  : 


ri,  Rupanam,  Of  colours.  ^<T,   Rupam,  colour. 
28.     Colour  (is  the  joint   effect)  of  many  colours.—  28. 

*  Colour  is  the  single  effect  '  —  this  is  the  con:  ection.  The  w  >rd 
<  colour  '  in  both  the  instances  are  indicatory,  and  its  indicative  power 
is  such  that  it  does  not  abandon  its  own  meaning.  And  die  common 
property  of  the  intrinsic  and  the  indicatory  significance  is  dependence 
upon  the  relation  of  the  product  and  producer  by  means  of  the  proximity 
known  as  combination  with  an  object  which  is  one  and  the  same  as  the 
cause.  Hence  Colour,  Taste,  Smell,  Touch,  Liquidity,  Natural  Fluidity, 
Unity,  and  Separateness  of  one  are  brought  together.  For  these,  being 
present  in  the  cause,  originate  in  the  effects  only  one  Attribute  of  the 
same  kind.  In  fact  the  operation  of  non-combinative  causes  is  two-fold- 
Some  produce  their  effects  by  pioximity  to  the  object  which  is  one  and 
the  same  as  the  cause.  Here  the  cause  is  the  combiaative  cause  and  it 
is  the  cause  of  the  effect,  namely  colour,  etc.,  which  have  to  be  produced. 
Thus  Colour  which  is  present  in  the  potsherd  originates  the  Colour  of  the 
pot  by  means  of  the  combination,  known  as  combination  with  the  object 
which  is  one  and  the  same  as  the  cause,  with  the  combinative  cause, 
namely  pot,  etc.,  of  the  effect  such  as  Colour,  etc.  Similarly  Taste,  etc. 
In  some  places,  however,  there  is  an  operation  of  non-combinative  causa 
lity  by  means  of  proximity  to  the  object  which  is  one  and  the  same  as 
the  effect.  For  instance,  Sound,  although  it  is  a  cause,  originates  in  the 
skv  another  Sound,  although  it  is  an  effect.  In  the  sky  itself  Colour, 
etc.,  also  are  produced  by  Conjunction  of  Fire  with  the  ultimate  atoms 
of  Earth  by  means  of  the  proximity  in  the  form  of  combination  with  the 
object  which  is  one  and  the  same  as  the  effect.  —  28. 

Above  continued. 
Lrpaskdra.—H.e  says  that  a  eiogle  Action  may  be  the  effect  of  many  oauses  : 

n  3  1  3  1 


KANADA  SOTRS  1,2,  1.  33 


Gurutva-prayatna-samyoganA,m,    of    Gravity,     Voli 
tion,  and  Conduction,  ?^7«lf  UtkSepanain,  Throwig  upwards. 

29.     Throwing    upwards    (is    the    joint  product)     of    Gravity, 
Volition,  and  Conjunction.  —  29. 

The  meaning  is  that  Throwing-  upwards  is  their  single  effect.  Here 
Weight  residing  in  the  hand,  stone,  etc.,  is  the  conditional  cause  and 
Conjunction  of  the  Soul  exercising  Volition  is  the  non-combinative  cause, 
of  the  Throwing  upwards  seated  in  the  hand,  whereas  the  non-coinbina- 
ive  cause  of  the  Throwing  upwards  seatel  in  the  stone  is  the  internal 
movement  or  vibration  of  the  hand. 

Here  also  the  term  Throwing  upwards  is  indicatory  of  Throwing 
downwards,  etc.  —  20. 

Causality  of  Action  upheld. 

Upask'.ira.  —  But  it  lias  been  said  that  Attributes  which  have  taken  a  shape,  (i.e.,  by 
appearing  in  some  Substance)  are,  as  effects,  preceded  (and  so  caused)  by  the  Attributes  of 
the  causes  ;  it  has  also  boen  .said  tnat  they  are  preceded  by  the  Attributes  of  that  in  which 
they  reside  ;  therefore  it  follows  that  Action  produces  no  effect  >vhatever.  That  being  so, 
even  the  inference  of  ultrasensual  phenomena  such  as  the  movements  of  the  Sun,  etc.,  becomes 
impossible  in  the  absence  of  any  mark  of  inference.  For  this  reason,  merely  reminding  the 
reader  of  what  has  already  been  said  in  the  aphorism  "  Action  iw  the  common  cause  of  Con 
junction,  Disjunction,  and  Impetus,"  he  says  : 


<nui:    Samyoga-vibhagah,  Conjunctions    and    Disjunction*. 
Cha,  and.  ^ijjqj'f  Karmmanam,  of  Actions. 


30.     Conjunctions    and    Disjunctions    also  (are    individually 
the  products)  of  Actions.  —  30. 

*  Products'  is  the  complement.  The  plural  number  is  for  the 
purpose  of  individual  reference.  '  Imprerssion*  also  should  be  taken  at 
indicated  — 

Vivriti.  —  The  word  '  cha  '  implies  Impetus  and  Elasticity  in  addi 
tion  (to  Conjunctions  and  Disjunctions). 

Above  continued. 

Upashira.  —  But  it  has  been  already  said  that  Substance  and  Action  are  not  the  effsoti 
of  Action.  Conjunction  and  Disjunction  again  are  the  effects  of  Conjunction  and  Disjunc 
tion  alone.  So  that  the  i  affirmation  of  the  Causality  of  Action  here  seems  to  bo  self-con 
tradictory.  So  he  sas  : 


in  i  \  I  \\\\ 

Karana-samanye,    under  the    topic  of    causes  in  general. 
f  Dravya-karmmanam,  of  Substances  and  Action.    V'R  Karrnma, 
Action.  Wfnw     Akaranam,  not  cause.  8rK  Uktam,  said. 


31.     Under   the   topic   of   causes  in  general,  Action  has  been 
stated  to  be  not  a  cause  of  Substances  and  Actions.  —  31. 


34  YAISL-SIKA   PHILOSOPHY 


The  word  •  Karanasamanya  '  denotes  the  topic  of  causes  in  ge.ieral. 
Thus  in  the  topic  of  the  statement  cf  causes  in  general.  Action  has  beea 
•  aid  to  be  not  a  cause  of  Substance  arid  Action,  and  not  that  it  is  alto 
gether  a  not-cause  only,  whereby  ihe  aphorism  "  Conjunctions  and  Dis- 
junctioi.s  also  are  individually  the  products  of  Act  in:  s  "  might  be 
destroyed. —  M 

Here  ends  the  lirst  chapter  lesso;i  of  the  Kirsi    Book  in  ihe  Co 
tarv  of  Srtnkara  (»;i  the  VaiAesika    aphorisms. 


KANADA  SUTRAS  I,  2,  1. 


HOOK   FIRST,  CHAPTER  SECOND. 


L'jia*kiii'U.  —  Well,  in  the  previous  section  the  Resemblance  of  the  three  1'rediuable.s  has  been 
stated  as  constituted  by  the  identity  oi1  sameness  of  their  efl'euts  and  causes.  Rut  this  is  riot 
OHtablished  as  tho  relation  of  effect  and  cause  itself  lias  not  been  proved.  Therefore  the 
author  says  : 

M  I  *  I  ?  M 

Karanabhavat,  from  the  uon-.existeuce  of  cause    VT33WT7: 
Karyyabhavah,  non-existence  of    effect. 

1.     Non-existence    o>f    effect    (follows)  from  the  non-existence 
of  cause.—  32. 

Whereas  it  is  seen  that  in  spite  of  earth,  wheel,  water,  putter, 
thread,  etc.,  being  brought  together,  there  is  non-existence  of  the  pot, 
if  there  is  non-existence  of  the;  potter's  staff,  and  that  in  spite  of  earth, 
water.  etc..  being  brought  together,  there  is  non-existence  of  the  shoot 
if  there  is  non-existence  of  the  seed  :  it  (/'.  e.,  non-existence)  cannot  be 
explained  without  the  relation  of  effect  and  cause  between  the  potter's 
staff  and  the  pot  or  between  the  seed  and  the  shoot.  Otherwise  there 
will  be  non-existence  of  the  pot  even  on  the  non-existence  of  the  loom, 
etc.,  and  there  will  be  non-existence  of  the  shoot  even  on  the  110.1  exis 
tence  of  pieces  of  stone,  etc.  Moreover  it  is  seen  that  the  pot,  a  piece 
of  cloth,  etc,  exist  for  a  time  only.  That  even  cannot  be  explained 
without  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect.  For  they  being  non-existent 
at  one  time,  their  temporariness  in  the  form  of  existence  at  another 
time  is  not  possible  but  by  the  dependence  of  existences  upon  causes. 
For  if  there  were  no  dependence  upon  causes,  then  a  thing  could  only 
be  or  not  be;  but  could  not  be  for  a  time  only;  since  an  existing  thing 
cannot  be  non-existent,  nor  can  it  come  into  existence  from  that  which 
is  not  its  cause,  nor  ca  i  it  come  into  existence  from  one  knows  not 
what,  nor  can  it  come  into  existence  from  unreal  things  such  as  tho 
horn  of  a  hare,  etc.,  but  from  a  really  existing  limit  or  beginning  like 
the  potter's  staff,  the  loom,  etc.,  as  is  seen  in  such  effects  as  a  pot,  a 
piece  of  cloth,  etc.  Now  the  limit  or  beginning  is  nothing  but  the  cause. 

Thus  if  the  relation  of  effect  and  cause  did  not  exist,  there  would 
be  no  inclination  or  disinclination  to  activity.  Then  the  world  would 
become  desireless,  inert.  For  there  can  be  no  activity  without,  the 
knowledge  that  this  is  the  means  of  attaining  that  which  is  desired  ; 
nor  can  there  be  forbearance  without  the  knowledge  that  this  is  th« 
means  of  avoiding  that  which  is  not  desired.  —  1. 

Vii-riti  _  Tho  Sankhya  thinkers  argue  as  follows  :  ''  A  water-jar, 
etc.,  existing  in  an  enveloped  state  in  earth,  etc.,  from  before,  develop 
into  visible  existence,  and  again  by  being  struck  with  a  cudgel,  etc-,  are 
enveloped  therein  and  exist.  So  that  production  and  destruction  are 
not  real,  but  merely  development  and  envelopment.  This  being  so.  why 
should  not  a  water-jar  be  produced  fruin  yarns  ?  It  cannot  be  said  that 
the  existence  of  eft'tct  in  causes  prior  to  their  production  is  without  evi- 


36  VA1SESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


dence,   for    the    proof    is    supplied  by   such  texts  of  Veda  as  <  Only  the 
existent,  0  Dear  One,  was  at  the  beginning/  (ChandogyaG,  2,  ],)  etc." 

This  view  should  be  considered.  The  admission  of  the  development 
b'f  development  will  entail  non-finality.  If  on  the  other  hand,  develop 
ment  be  previously  non-existent,  then  it  will  be  necessary  to  admit  pro 
duction  from  the  non-existent,  and  hence  the  supposition  of  the  prior 
existence  of  the  water-pot,  etc.,  will  become  groundless.  Thus  causality 
is  the  belonging  to  the  class  of  invariable  and  unconditional  antece 
dents  which  cannot  be  otherwise  accounted  for,  or  the  quality  of  that 
which  fails  to  produce  an  effect  on  account  of  defect  in  the  eontribu- 
tories,  or  an  additional  Predicable,  being  a  particular  relation  arisino- 
out  of  its  own  nature. 

JBhdtya. — Predicables  called  Substance,  Attribute,  and  Action  have 
been  mentioned.  Their  tidmdnya  or  common  characteristic  has  been 
stated.  Their  Visesa  or  distinctive  characteristic,  again,  follows  from 
its  contrariety  to  the  common  characteristic.  All  this  is  sufficient  for 
the  production  of  tattva-jndna.  The  Supremo  Grood  results  from  tattva- 
jfidna.  This  is  apavarga,  Salvation.  But  what  is  its  characteristic 
form  ?  How  does  it  appear  ? — All  this  is  no\v  here  described. 

Non-existence  of  the  effect,  e..  y..  the  faults  (namely,  desire,  aversion, 
and  infatuation),  etc.,  (results)  from  non-existence  of  the  cause,  e.j/., 
false  knowledge  (?..  «/.,  the  idea  of  the  Self  iu  the  Not-Self),  etc.  li  Thus, 
Pain,  birth,  activity,  faults,  and  false  knowledge, — on  the  successive 
annihilation  of  these  in  turn,  there  is  the  annihilation  of  the  one  next 
before  the  other/'  (Xydya  ti&tram,  I.  i.  2),  the  ultimate  consequence 
being  Emancipation,  the  return  of  the  Self  into  its  own  nature. 

Above  continued. 

Upatkdra. — II  may  bo  objected  that  only  the  existent  is  produced,  and  not  the 
non-existent,  according  to  the  authority  of  the  Veda,  e.  g.,  "  Verily  the  existent  was  at  the 
beginning,  0  calm  one!,"  etc.  Otherwise  in  the  case  of  undifferentiated  non-existence  there 
will  be  no  such  uniformity  that  a  piece  of  cloth  is  produced  front  t breads  only  and  not  from 
potsherds.  If  it  is  so  then,  we  reply,  this  uniformity  must  be  accepted  by  the  advocates  of 
the  doctrine  of  transformation  (*?f^IJT*T3Tiv)  who  admit  the  theory  of  causes  ;  otherwise 
how  it  happens  that  the  manifestation  of  the  pot  is  only  in  the  potsherds,  ai.-d  not  in 
thread  ?  Moreover  if  the  manifestation  or  development  also  really  existed  from  before,  then 
that  too  being  eternal,  it  comes  to  this  that  production  and  destruction  are  merely  develop 
ment  and  envelopment.  Now,  development  and  envelopment  depend  upon  causes.  There 
fore  it  results  that  a  pot,  a  piece  of  cloth,  etc.,  also  surely  depend  upon  causes  arid  also  that 
there  is  production  ol  that  which  was  not  before.  The  objection  that  there  is  no  proof  of 
the  uniformity  towards  the  cause  is  answered  by  the  uniformity  of  the  nature  of  the  cause, 
and  this  uniformity  of  the  nature  of  the  cause  (to  produce  the  effect)  becomes  known  by 
the  method  of  agreement  arid  difference.  For  it  if>  a  universal  experience  that  no  pot  is 
produced  without  a  potter's  staff  and  tnat  a  pot  is  produced  when  there  is  the  potter's  staff. 
Thus  causality  is  the  quality  of  that  which  belongs  to  the  class  of  invariable  and  uncondi 
tional  antecedents,  which  cannot  be  otherwise  established  or  explained,  or  the  characteristic 
of  being  attended  with  the  non-production  of  the  effect  due  to  defect  in  some  contributory 
oause.  Although  there  is  no  invariable  antecedence  in  such  places  as  "  one  should  perform 
sacrifice  with  barley  or  with  paddy,"  etc.,  because  the  sacrifice  with  paddy  is  not  an 
antecedent  of  the  result  producible  by  the  sacrifice  with  barley,  still  a  oause  ordained  in  the 
alternative  is  truly  a  oause,  as  causality  is  proved  in  the  case  of  both  even  though  th« 
results  are  similar  in  kind.  Tiius  the  characteristic  of  being  attended  with  the  non-produc 
tion  of  the  effect  due  to  defect  in  some  contributory  cause,  forms  the  causality  which  is 
•common  to  both  secular  and  scriptural  practices  ;  whereas  invariable  antecedence  known  by 
the  method  tf  agreement  and  difference  is  (he  causality  which  1*  secular  onlv.  For  in  such 


KAN  AD  A  SUTK  AS  1,  2,  o. 


cases  as  "  He  who  desires  heaven  should  perform  sacrifice,"  etc;.,  the  difference  or  negative 
side  is  not  required,  because  knowledge  of  the  agreement  or  positive  side  alone  is  sufficient 
to  induce  activity.  For  this  reason  also,  if  the  alternative  is  assumed,  then  both  lo.se  their 
significance  in  the  code,  for  the  result  of  the  same  kind  being  secured  by  one  alone,  the 
performance  of  the  other  becomes  futile.  Hence  also  it  has  been  rightly  said  :  "  The  result 
ncceBsarilyAfollows  from  practices  taught  in  the  Veda,  if  performed  in  all  their  parts." 
When  the  Acharyya  (preceptor)  says  "  And  this  object  proceeding  from  the  Veda,  breach  of 
uniformity  is  no  fault,"  he  only  means  to  refer  to  ordinary  objects.  In  the  case  of  grass, 
igniting  wood,  and  jewel,  however,  heterogeneity  of  effect  is  necessary  ;  because  there 
causality  being  inferred  by  agreement  and  difference,  non-existence  of  the  effect  is  necessary 
from  non-existence  of  the  cause.  If  heterogeneity  of  effect  is  supposed  in  alternative  oases, 
causality  will  be  in  the  alternative  in  Rajasuya,  Vajapeya,  and  other  sacrifices.  For  these 
reasons  he  goes  on  establishing  the  same  law  of  the  relation  of  effect  and  cause. 

.  n  \  I  *  I  *  u 

*  Na,  not.  g  Tu,  but.  qntrfWffit   Kuryyubhuvat,  from    non-existence 
of  effect.  qWQWI?:    Karanabhavah,  non-existence  of  causes. 


2.     But   non-existence   of  cause  (does)    not  (follow)  from  the 
non-existence  of  the  effect.  —  33. 

If  the  la«.v  of  the  relation  of  effect  and  cause  do  not  exist,  the  non- 
existence  of  cause  will  follow  also  from  non-existence  of  effect.  Non- 
existence  of  effect  is  not  instrumental  towards  the  nou-existeuce  of 
cause  ;  but  non-existence  of  cause  instrumental  towards  non-existence 
of  effect.  Thus  the  application  of  this  introductory  section  of  two 
aphorisms  is  that  persons  desirous  of  nwksa,  (salvation)  are  concerned 
in  non-existence  of  birth  for  the  sake  of  non-existence  of  pain,  m  non- 
existence  of  activity  for  the  sake  of  non-existence  of  birth  in,  non- 
existence  of  faults  for  the  sake  of  non-existence  of  activity,  in  preven 
tion  of  false  knowledge  for  the  sake  of  non-existence  of  faults,  and  in 
spiritual  intuition  of  tho  Self  for  the  sake  of  prevention  of  false 
knowledge.  —  2. 

Dlulsya  :  The  aphorism  is  meant  for  them  who  think  that  apacuryii 
is  mere  absence  of  pain. 

Non-existence  of  the  cause,  viz.,  birth,  etc.,  does  not  follow  from 
non-existence  of  the  effect,  viz.,  pain.  Birth,  etc.,  therefore,  may  still 
take  place  even  when  no  pain  exists.  If  birth,  etc.,  are  thus  possible,  then 
there  is  possibility  of  pain  also,  in  consequence  of  the  appearance  of 
the  causes  of  pain.  Apavarga,  accordingly,  does  not  lie  in  the  mere 
absence  of  pain,  but  in  the  permanent  impossibility  of  pain,  resulting 
in  the  order  of  the  successive  non-existence  of  false  knowledge,  etc. 

Genus  and  Species  relative   to  understanding. 

Upaskdra.—  After  the  irarks  of  the  three  Predicates  in  the    order    of  their  enumeration, 
h«  now  states  the  mark  of  the  Predi  cables,  Genus,  which  has  also  boon  mentioned 

in  I  *  H  n 

Samanyam,    Genus,    fe^H:    Visesah,   Species-    fft  Iti,    th«se. 
Buddhyapeksam,  relative  to  understanding. 


VAISJ^IKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


3.  The  notions,  Genus  and  Species,  are  relative  to  the 
Understanding.— 34. 

Genus  is  two-fold,  high  and  low,  of  which  the  first  is  Existence 
and  the  second  is  Substanceness,  etc.,  pervaded  by  Existence.  The 
Understanding  itself  is  the  mark  of  Genus  and  its  Species  :  the  cogni 
tion  of  re-appearance  or  recurrence,  of  Genus,  and  the  cognition  of 
disappearance  ur  reversion,  of  species.  The  word  •  ill  '  takes  thorn 
singly,  and  hence  the  word  <  buddhyapeksam  '  has  been  used  in  tho 
neuter  gender.  The  writer  of  the  -vrltti  'however  applies  it  to  species 
only  and  explains  its  use  in  the  singular  number  and  neuter  gender 

the    rule.      <  A    word    in  the  neuter  gender  used  with  a  word  not  in 

the  neuter  gender  optionally  entails    neuter    gender  and    singlar    num- 

Buddhyapeksam  '  means    that,    of    which  the  understanding  or 

cognition  is  the    mark    or    the    definition.     <  Genus  '    in  '  the    aphorism 

means  that  which  is  external  and  resides  in  more  individuals    than  one. 

enus,  whether  high  or  low,  is,  while  it    is    eternal,    co-existent    in 

a  me  substratum  with  the  mutual  non-existence  of  its  own  situation 

Moreover  Genus  also  takes  the  name   of  Spe-ies,  as  for 

example,  at  the  same  time  that  there  is  the  cognition    of    re-appearance 

or  recurrance,  namely,  <  This  is    Substance,'  <  This    is    Substance/  and 

s  >  on,  there  is  the  particular  cognition  that  it  is  not   Attribute,     that  it 

t  Action,  etc.  So  that  the  nature  of  species  belongs  to  the  genera 
themselves,  c.  <j..  substanceness,  etc. 

It  may   be    objected,  "  Genus    (/.  t.,  the    Universal),  as  an  objective 

reality,  is  a  non-entity,  since  the  consciousness  of  recognition  can  be 
explained  (without  it)  by  the  absence  of  reversion  or  divergence.  For 
the  object  of  the  cognition.  «  It  is  a  cow,"  is  that  it  is  not  different 
from  a  cow.  Even  the  advocate  of  the  doctrine  of  kinds  (jAti}  admits 
that  this  is  the'subject-matter  of  the  concrete  cognitions  of  bovineness, 
et;-  ;  for  coiicreteness  or  particularity  is  not  "something  other  than 
absence  of  difference  from  itself  ;  it  is  the  absence  of  divergence  from  a 
«-ow,  etc.,  which  is  also  the  occasion  of  the  use  of  the  words  cow.  etc. 
Moreover,  where  does  the  Genus  of  bovineness  reside  V  Not  surely  in 
the  bovine  animal,  because  the  animal  is  non-existent  prior  to  the 
appearance  of  bovineness.  Nor  in  anon-bovine  animal,  because  there 
will  be  then  contradiction.  Whence  does  bovineness  come  to  reside  in 
the  body  of  a  bovine  animal  when  such  a  body  is  produced?  It  did 
not  surely  remain  in  that  locality,  for  that  place  also  will  then  possess 
bovineness.  Nor  is  bovineness  even  produced  then  and  there,  for  it  (a 
Genus)  has  been  observed  to  be  eternal.  Xor  can  it  come  from  else 
where,  for  it  (a  Genus)  possesses  m>  activity.  Nor  again  does  one  eternal 
possess  the  characteristic  of  appearing  in'many  individuals,  for  there 
is  no  proof  that  it  (a  Genus)  optionally  appears  in  part  and  as  a  whole. 
For  the  whole  does  not  appear  in  a  single  place,  siuco  then  it  would 
follow  that  there  would  be  no  concrete  cognition  of  it  in  other  places. 
Nor  does  it  appear  in  part  for  a  >  class'  is  not  confined  to  one  part. 
So  it  has  been  said.  ;<  It  does  not  move,  nor  was  it  there.  Nor  is 
it  produced,  nor  has  it  parts.  Nor  does  it  leave  its  former  residence. 
Alas!  the  succession  of  difficulties."  Genus  exists  and  that  is  manifested 
by  situation  or  organisation  only  like  bovineness.  potriess,  etc,  But  it 


KAXAOA   SftTRAS  T,  2. 


does  not  belong  to  Attribute  and  Action  also."     Such  is    the  quarrel  of 
kind  rod  thinkers. 

To  this  ft  is  said,  "Genus  is  eternal  a:id  pervasive  ;  and  pervasive 
ness  consists  in  lieing1  related  to  all  place  by  its  own  form.  It  does  not 
arise  that  places  should  be  treated  in.  the  terms  of  bovineness,  for  the 
use  of  bovineness  is  obtained  by  the  relation  known  as  combination;  as 
^Time  possesses  form  or  clour' — such  cognition  and  use  do  not  arise, 
because  Time  does  not  possesses  form  or  colour,  etc.  Xor  can  it  be  said 


pervades  !a  parl 

cular  spot,  combines  with  the  organism  which  is  produced  in  that  verv 
place,  as  it  is  found  that  •  it  is  produced'  and  ••  it  is  combined  (with 
bovineness),"  refer  to  the  same  moment  of  Time.  Hereby  "  where  does 
it  reside  ?  "  is  answered  by  ••  where  it  is  perceived  ;  "  "where  is  it 
perceived  ?"  by  •'  where  it  resides  ;"  and  ••  what  sort  of  a  body  it  was 
prior  to  the  appearance  of  bovineness  ?"  by  u  It  did  not  exist  at  all." 
Similarly  •'  It  does  not  move,  nor  was  it  there,  etc.,"  is  so  much  .cry  of 
despair.  The  Genus  of  bovineness  is  nothing  but  non-divergence  of 
cognition  from  what  it  has  been, — this  is  obstructed  or  contradicted  bv 
the  real  or  positive  cognition  ••  It  is  a  cow  or  ox."  For  the  cognition 
also  is  not  explained,  as  it  has  been  said  that  the  cognition  of  a  real 
existence  does  not  help  the  understanding  of  negation,  nor  does  diver 
gence  from  a  cow  or  ox  come  to  light  in  the  cognition  "  It  is  a  cow  or 
ox."  The  option  of  whole  and  part  can  arise  only  if  a  single  Genus 
appear  as  a  whole  or  as  a  part.  Wholeness  means  multitude  and  infini 
ty,  and  it  is  not  proved  in  an  individual.  ••  '  This  is  a  cow  or  ox' — such 
cognitions  arise  in  respect  of  n  on -entities  and  are  not  capable  of  esta 
blishing  entities  "—to  this  the  reply  will  be  given  afterwards. 

The  followers  of  PraltJirtkam  (a  thinker  of  the  Mimarasa  School) 
however  say  that  Genus  is  manifested  by  its  situation  (?!.  c.,the  organism 
where  it  resides).  If  it  is  evidenced  by  reeognitive  understanding,  then 
what  offence  has  been  committed  by  Genera  belonging  to  Attibute  and 
Action  ?  For  there  arises  consciousness  of  recognition  or  knowing 
again  in  respect  of  Colour..  Taste,  etc.  ;  and  this  consciousness  surely 
establishes  a  '  class  '  (jV'W)-  si'^e  there  is  no  obstruction.  As  it  is  in  the 
case  of  Ether-ness,  identity  of  the  individual  is  not  the  obstruction  in  the 
class  attributes  of  Colour,  etc.  Nor  is  co-extension  the  obstniction 
here  as  it  is  in  the  case  of  Understanding  and  Knowledge  or  in  the  case 
of  the  classes  of  water-pots  and  water-jars,  because  of  the  multiplicity 
of  individual  Colours,  Tastes,  etc.  For  co-extension  is  denotation  of 
neither  more  nor  less  individuals  :  and  the  class  attributes  of  colour, 
etc.,  have  a  narrower  denotation  than  Attribute-ness,  and  have  a  wider 
denotation  than  blue-ness,  etc.  For  this  reason  also,  there  is  no  over 
lapping  or  intermixture  (which  is  also  an  obstruction  to  the  existence 
of  Genus),  as  there  is  in  the  case  of  the  characteristics  of  being 
material  and  ponderable  substances,  because  although  their  mutual 
absolute  non-existences  co-exist  in  the  same  substratum,  yet  there  is  no 
co-existence  with  any  other  class.  Xor  is  here  instability  or  infinite 
regression,  because  other  Genera  included  in  Colourness.  etc.,  are  not 


40  vAisEsriwv  PHILOSOPH 


recognised.  Xor  is  here  loss  of  form  or  transformation  as  in  the  case 
of  species.  If  species,  while  residing  in  substances,  possess  classes  or 
jdti  then  they  will  become  either  Attributes  or  Action  ;  if  while  appear 
ing  in  Universals(V.  </.,  Time,  Spaca,  Ether,  and  Son!)  they  possess  classes 
or  jdti,  then  they  will  become  Attributes.  The  transformation  which 
thus  takes  place  in  the  case  of  the  Predicable,  Species,  is  absent  in  the 
case  of  the  subject  under  enquiry.  Xor  is  here  non-relation,  as  in  the 
case  of  Combination.  Let  there  be  non-relation  in  the  case  of  Combina 
tion,  seeing  that  the  supposition  of  Combination  of  Combination  will 
entail  infinite  regression  ;  but  in  the  case  of  the  subject  under  enquiry 
the  relation  of  Combination  itself  is  recognised.  Although  identity  of 
the  individual  itself  is  an  obstruction  to  Combination  being  a  Genus 
yet  the  view  of  those  also  should  be  considered,  who  hold  that  Combina 
tions  are  many  in  number  and  undergo  production  and  destruction. 
Or  it  (absence  of  combination  or  identity  of  the  individual"  is  the 
obstruction  to  Xon-existe.ice,  etc..  being  (ienera. 

The  learned  writer  of  the  'Yt'ltti  has  said  :  li  The  point  in  dispute, 
namely,  recognitive  understanding,  because  it  is  an  unobstructed, 
recurrent  consciousness,  is  explained  by  a  recurrent  property,  as  the 
consciousness,  •  garland-flowers  '  (covers  all  the  flowers  making  up  a 
particular  garland  and  is  explained  by  the  common  property  of  lulojio-- 
ing  to  that  garland,  whieh  recuis  in  eyery  one  of  those  J|o\y<>rsV  This 
requires  consideration. —  •"">. 

]'irriti  : — The    Xyaya    teachers     have    recited   the    obstructions    to 
Genus  :  "  Identity  of  the    Individual,   Similarity   or  Co-extension,  Over 
lapping  or  Intermixture,  Instability    or  Infinite    Regression.     Transfor 
mation,  and  Non-relation, — this  is  the    collection   of  the  obstructions  to 
Genus. ''  Xow,  Ether-ness  is  not  a  Genus,  as  it  denotes  only  one  individual. 
Pot-ness    and    Jar-ness    are    not    two    genera,    because*  the  individuals 
denoted    by  the    one     are    neither    more  nor  less  than    by    the    other. 
Material-ness  and  ponderableness  are  not  genera,  because,  by  appearing 
in  the  same  individual,  the  substrata  of  their  respective    absolute    non- 
existence  would  then  intermix.     Genus-ness  is  not  a    Genus,  on  account 
of  infinite  regression.  The  transformation  of  Species  which  is  by  nature 
exclusive,  is  an  obstruction  to  its  being  a  Genus.     If   Particularity  be  a 
Genus,  then,  itself  possessing  Genus,  it  will  not  be  possible  for  it  to  distin 
guish    itself    and    therefore    its  special  property  of  self-distinction  will 
suffer.     Therefore  Particularity  or  Species  is  not    a    Genus.     Or    trans- 
formation  may  mean  change  of  nature.   So  that  if  Species,  while  appear- 
ing  in  ponderable    things,    possess    Genera,  then    they  would    be    either 
Attributes  or  Actions.   If  while  appearing  in  the  universals  (e.  #.,  Ether, 
Space,  Time,  and  Soul)  they  possess  Genera,  then  they  would    be  Attri 
butes.     In  this  way  change  of  nature  of  the  Species    is    the    obstruction 
to    Species   possessing    the    characteristic     of    Genus.     Combination  or 
Co-inherence  is  not  a  Genus,  as    the   relation    of   combination    does   not 
exist  in  it,    since  the    admission  of  combination  into  combination  would 
entail  infinite  regression.  This  applies  to  the  view  that  combinations  are 
many  in  number  and  undergo   production    and    destruction.     Otherwise 
from  the  identity  of  the  individual  also  Combination  cannot  be  a  Genus. 
Similarly  the  absence  of  the  relation  of  Combination  is    an    obstruction 


KANADA  StTRAS  I,  2,  5. 


41 


to    Non  -existence    being    a  Genus  ;  and    other     instances     should    be 
understood. 

Existence  is  Genus  only. 

Upaskdra.  —  Proving  the  two-foldness   which  has  boou  stated  above  of  Genus   and  Specios, 
lie  says  : 


n  \  \ 


n 


I^:  Bhavah,  existence,  being.  1133^:  Anuvritteh,  of  recurrence, 
assimilation  or  extensive  denotation.  ^  Eva,  only,  t^f^  Hetutvat, 
being  the  cause.  flT*r  ?4  Sfimanyam,  Genus.  ^  Eva,  only. 

4.  Existence,    being    the    cause    of  assimilation  only,  is  only 
a  Genus.  —  35. 

'Bhavah,'  i.e.,  existence,  is  the  cause  of  assimilation  only,  and  not 
of  differentiation  also.  Therefore  it  does  not  take  the  name  Species.  —  4, 

Genera-Species. 
UpasMra.  —  What  Genera  take  the  name  of  Species  ?     To  meet  this  expectancy  he  say»  j 

\ 

Dravyatvam,  substance-ness.   »J*ir?3    Gunatvam,    attributeness. 
Karmmatvam,    action-ness.     ^    Cha,    and.     ^W^l^T  Samanyjini, 
Genera.   f?nfr<?T:  Visesah,  species.    =g  Cha,  also. 

5.  Substance-ness,   and   Attribute-ness  and   Action-ness  are 
both  Genera  and  Species.  —  36. 

The  word  '  cha  '  collects  Earth-ness,  and  other  genera  belonging  to 
Substance,  Colour-ness,  and  other  genera  belonging  to  Attribute,  Throw- 
ing-up-ness,  and  other  genera  belonging  to  Action.  *  Substance-ness, 
etc./  have  been  left  uncompounded  in  order  to  indicate  the  absence  of 
the  relation  of  that  which  pervades  and  that  which  is  pervaded, 
from  amongst  them.  '  Genera  and  Species  have  not  been  compounded 
so  that  it  may  be  understood  that  these  are  Species  also  even  while  they 
possess  the  characterises  of  Genera.  Otherwise  (if  the  words  were 
compounded)  there  might  be  a  mistake  that  the  compound  was  a  genitive 
one  and  then  the  being  Species  would  not  have  been  perceived  in  the 
presence  of  Genus-ness. 

It  might  be  objected,  "  Substance-ness  cannot  be  something  which 
penetrates  into  or  inheres  in  the  forms  of  substance  and  is  beyond  the 
cognizance  of  the  senses,  because  if  it  somehow  exists  in  Earth,  etc.,  it* 
existence  is  impossible  in  the  case  of  Ari,  Ether,  etc.  It  cannot  be  estab 
lished  as  something  which  constitues  the  combinative  cause  of  an  effect 


42  VAT&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


determined  by  Attribute-ness,  because  Attribute-ness,  as  it  appears  in 
eternal  and  non-eternal  objects,  is  not  the  determinant  of  being  an 
effect.  The  rejoinder  that  it  is  required  for  the  sake  of  Attribute-ness 
does  not  improve  the  situation."  The  objection  however  does  not  arise, 
for  Substance-ness  is  established  by  the  way  of  constituting  the  combi 
native  causlity  of  an  effect  determined  by  the  characteristic  of  Con 
junction.  This  causality  cannot  be  constituted  by  the  class  attribute 
of  Earth-ness,  which  is  of  a  narrower  comprehension,  nor  by  Existence 
which  has  a  wider  denotation;  and  there  must  be  something  to  constitute 
or  define  it,  as  otherwise  suddenness  or  chance  would  bo  the  result. 
Now  Conjunction  must  necessarily  be  recognized  in  the  case  of  ultimate 
atoms,  as  supplying  the  non-combinative  cause  of  a  molecule  of  two 
atoms  ;  in  the  case  of  molecules  of  two  atoms  each,  as  supplying  the  non- 
combinative  cause  uf  a  molecule  of  three  atoms ;  in  the  case  of  the  four 
universals  (''.</.,  Time,  Space,  Ether,  and  Soul),  through  their  being  its  con 
junction  with  all  ponderable  things  ;  in  the  case  of  Mind;  as  the  ground 
for  the  conjunction  of  Mind  and  the  Senses  ;  in  the  case  of  Air,  as  the 
support  fur  the  movement  of  grass,  etc.  ;  in  the  case  of  perceptible 
Substances,  through  their  very  perceptibility.  On  the  other  hand, 
there  is  no  un-uriginated  Conjunction  so  that  it  could  be  said 
that  the  quality  of  Conjunction  even,  appearing  in  effects  and 
not-effects,  could  not  be  the  determinant  of  being  an  effect.  Li 
like  manner,  it  is  easily  demonstrable  that  substance-ness  is 
established  also  by  the  way  of  constituting  the  combinative 
causality  of  Disjunction  also.  Attribute-ness  again,  it  lias  been 
already  said,  is  proved  by  its  being  the  deterininat  of  the  causality 
which  exists  in  a  thing  possessing  Genus  and  not  containing  the  non- 
combinative  causality  of  the  combinative  causality  of  Conjunction  and 
Disjunction.  The  class  attribute  of  Actions  also,  is,  in  the  case  of 
perceptible  Substances,  cognizable  by  the  cognition,  '  It  moves,'  but 
in  other  places  can  be  inferred  from  Conjunction  and  Disjunction,  for 
Action-ness  is  required  to  be  established  also  by  its  being  the  deter 
minant  of  the  non-combinative  causality  of  both  Conjunction  and 
Disjunction.  For  this  reason  also  it  is  possible  to  infer  the  movement 
(»f  the  sun  from  its  reaching  another  place.  Here  although  the  other 
place,  P.<J.,  of  Sky.  etc.,  is  beyond  the  reach  of  the  senses,  yet  the  Con 
junction  and  Disjunction  of  the  solar  rays  are  perceptible  by  the  solar 
zone,  and  it  is  from  these  Conjunctions  and  Disjunctions  that  the 
inference  of  the  movement  of  the  sun  can  be  drawn.  The  learned 
Uddyotaliura  has  said  :  "  The  inference  of  the  movement  of  the  sun  is 
by  its  reaching  a  different  place,  which  again  is  also  a  matter  of 
inference  in  the  following  way  :  The  sun  which  is  perceived  by  a  man 
when  facing  eastwards,  is  also  perceived  by  him  when  facing  the  west, 
and  is  recognised  by  him.  This  fact  together  with  the  fact  that  the 
sun  is  a  substance  and  is  not  destroyed  and  produced  again  at  every 
moment,  is  proof  that  the  sun  has  reached  a  different  place  from  where 
it  was  before." — 5. 

Final  Species  excluded. 

Upa*k<"n-a.— -But  is  it  the  same  Species  which  has  been  enumerated  as  a  Predicable, 
which  IK  here  described  as  both  Garni B  and  Species  ?  Removing  this  curiosity  of  the  disciples 
he  says  : 


KANADA  SUTRAS  I,  2,8. 


Auyatra,     elsewhere.    3J'?3*q:     Antyebhyah,     iiiial. 
Viiesebhyh,  than  species. 

6.     (The   statement   of   Genus   and   Species  has  been  made) 
with  the  exception  of  the  final  Species.  —  37. 

The  meaning  is  that  the  statement  of  Genus  and  Species  is  to  the  ex 
clusion  of  those  final  Species*  residing  in  eternal  substances,  which  have 
been  mentioned  above.  l  Antyah/  i.  e.  <  final/  means  those  which  exist 
or  appear  at  the  end  (of  the  division  or  dissolution  of  compounds.)  The 
teachers  say  that  they  are  '  final/  because  after  them  there  is  no 
other  principle  of  differentiation.  According  to  the  Vrittikdra  they  are 
'  final  Species/  because  they  exist  in  enternal  Substances,  t.  e.  Sub 
stances  which  exist  at  the  end  of  production  and  destruction.  They 
are  really  Species  only,  the  causes  of  the  consciousness  of  differentia 
tion,  and  not  of  the  form  of  Genus  also.  —  6. 


]£x  tsti'iicc  dcji 
.  —  -A  j^ood  many  men  doubt  that  Existence  it  a  (.ronus..   So  lie  ^'ives  its  proof  : 

R  i  vs  n 


g-^    Sat,    existent.    ffa    Iti,    thus.    q?T:  Yatuh,    whence. 
Dravyaguna-karniasu,    in       respect     of     Substance,     Attribute,      and 
Action.     5ETT    Sa,  that.    ^(^\    Satta,  existence. 

7,  Existence  is  that  to  which  are  due  the  belief  and  usage, 
namely  '(It  is)  existent/  in  respect  of  Substance,  Attribute,  and 
Action.—  38. 

By  the  word  '  iti  '  he  teaches  the  mode  of  belief  and  usage.  Thus 
Existence  is  that  which  causes  the  belief  in  this  way  that  this  is 
existent,  that  that  is  existent,  in  the  case  of  the  triad  of  Substance,  etc., 
or  on  which  depends  the  application  of  the  words  in  the  from  of  '  it  is 
existent/  '  it  is  existent/  —  7. 

Existence  not  identical  with  Substance,    Attribute,  or  Action. 

Upaskdra.  —  But  Existence  is  not  perceived  as  being  separate  from  Substance,  Attri 
bute,  and  Action.  Therefore  Existence  is  nothing  else  than  one  or  other  of  Substance,  etc, 
Because  that  which  is  different  from  something  else  is  perceived  by  means  of  its  difference 
from  that,  as  a  water-pot  from  a  piece  of  cloth.  But  Existence  is  not  perceived  by  mean* 
of  its  difference  from  them.  Therefore  it  is  identical  with  them.  To  meet  this  objection 
he  says  : 


Dravya-guna-karmmabhyah,        from        Substance 

Attribute,  and  Action.     «ft|!?a<     Arthantaram,  a  different    object.    *r 
Satta,  existence. 

*  It  is  th«  introduction  of  these  "  final  species,"  which    is   the   reason   why   the 
of  Kunad*  i.«  called  th«  Vai&ttta  philosophy  of  final  species. 


VAI&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


8.     Existence  is  a  different  object  from  Substance.  Attribute, 
and  Action.  —  39. 

Substance,  etc.,  are  non-assimilative  but  Existence  is  assimilative. 
Thus  '  Existence  is  a  different,  etc.,'  because  its  difference  from  them  is 
established  by  the  consideration  of  the  opposite  properties  charac 
terised  by  assimilativeness  and  non-assimilativeness.  That,  however, 
it  is  not  perceived  elsewhere  than  in  them,  is  due  to  the  virtue  of  their 
primary  or  natural  inter-relation,  whereas  the  relation  of  a  pot  and 
a  piece  of  cloth  is  derivative  or  artificial. 

The  intrinsic  form  of  the  individual  is  not  Existence,  for  in 
dividuals  do  not  assimilate  themselves  or  form  themselves  into  classes. 
If  the  inner  nature  be  assimilative,  then  the  same  is  nothing  but 
Existence.  If  non-assimilative  inner  natures  or  essences  be  the  means 
of  classification,  then  the  class  attributes  of  bovineness,  etc.,  are  also 
gone.  This  consideration  also  dismisses  the  objection,  "When  the 
practice  of  classification  is  established  by  those  very  objects  in  which 
as  substrata  Existence  inheres,  then  what  is  the  use  of  Existence  ?" 
For  the  same  reason  also  it  is  not  valid  to  hold  that  Existence  is  the 
property  which  makes  an  object  and  its  action  possible,  or  that  Ex 
istence  is  reasonableness  or  reliability  ;  for  the  cognition  l  It  is 
existent/  arises  even  in  the  absence  of  any  enquiry  in  those  res 
pects.  —  8. 

Bhasya:  —  Existence  is  a  difierent  'object'  from  Substance,  Attri 
bute,  anb  Action  Substance,  Attribute,  and  Action  are  called  objects 
(VIII.  ii.  3).  Existence  is,  therefore,  included  amongst  them.  But  it 
is  not  contained  in  the  ascertained  classes  of  Substance,  Attribute,  aad 
Action.  Hence  it  is  said  to  bo  a  different  object  from  them  known 
classes). 

Above  continued. 
U'paskdra.—'K.c  points  out  another  differentia: 


Guna-karmmasu,  in  Attributes  and  Actions  =g  Cha, 
and.  WI=Uqf,  .Bhavat,  from  Existence,  sf  Na,  not  ^4  Karmma,  Action. 
*r  Na,  not  gqp  Gunah  Attribute. 

9.     And   as   it  exists  in  Attributes  and  Actions,  therefore  it  is 
neither  Attribute  nor  Action.—  40. 

"  Neither  Attribute  nor  Action"  —  this  being  the  matter  to  be  ex 
pressed,  their  individual  mention  (i.  e.}  the  words  being  not  compound 
ed)  indicates  that  Existence  is  not  Substance  also.  For  an 
Action  does  not  exist  in  Actions,  nor  an  Attribute  in  Attributes,  nor 
does  Substance  exist  in  an  Attribute  or  Action.  Existence  however 
resides  in  Attribute  and  Action.  Therefore  on  account  of  its  Difference 
from  Substance,  Attribute,  and  Action,  Existence  is  really  different 
from  them.  —  9. 

Above  continued. 

lTpet,sk6r*.  —  H*  mentions  »noth«r  cliflfartnti*: 


KANADA  SUTRAS  I,  2,  12.  45 


=3  ii  ?  i  R  i  ?o  n 

Samanya-visesabhavena,  by    reason  of    the    absence 
of  Genus-Species  ^  Cha,  and. 

10.     (Existence    is    different   fom    Substance,    Attribute,  and 
Action),  also  by  reason  of  the  absence  of  Genus-Species  in  it.  —  41. 

If  Existence  be  Substance,  Attribute,  or  Action,  then  it  would 
contain  in  it  Genera  which  are  Species  also.  But  in  Existence  these 
Genera-Species,  namely,  Substance-ness,  etc.,  are  not  perceived.  For 
nobody  ever  has  the  perception  that  Existence  is  Substance,  Attribute, 
or  Action.  —  10. 

Substance-ness  not  identical  with  Substance,  Attribute  or  Action. 

Upask'lra.—  Having  thus  stated  the  distinction  of   Existence  from    Substance,   Attribute, 
and  Action,  he  states  the  distinction  of  Substance-ness  from  them. 


in  i  R  !  ??  II 

Aneka-dravya-vattvena,  by  means  of  its  containing 
more  than  one  Substance.  ?^^  Dravyatvam,  Substance-ness.  3tfi 
Uktam,  explained. 

11.     Substance-ness   has    been   explained    by    means     of    its 
containin    more  than  one  Substance.  —  42. 


'  Anekadravyavat  '  means  that  to  which  belong  more  than  one 
Substance  as  its  combinative  causes.  The  term  '  more  than  one  '  here 
denotes  all.  Hence  it  is  distinguished  from  Earth-ness,  etc.  Its  '  eter- 
nality  '  is  obtained  simply  from  its  being  a  Genus  ;  hence  its  distinc 
tion  from  wholes  made  up  of  parts.  And  '  anekdravyavattvam  '  means 
the  being  combined  with  more  than  one  Substance  in  general  ;  hence 
its  distinction  from  Existence.  Therefore  Substance-ness  is  eternal  and 
combined  with  more  than  one  Substance  in  general,  Hence  it  is 
implied  that  conjunction  is  not  desired.  And  Substance-ness  also  has 
been  verily  establshed.  'Substance-ness  explained',  means  that  Subs 
tance-ness  also  has  been  explained  in  the  very  same  way  as  Ex 
istence.  —  11. 

Above  continued- 

Vpaskdra.—  But  Substance-ness  is  also  a  '  class,'  and  can  bo    quite  non-distinct    from  it« 
own  ground.     What  is  the  fault  here  ?     So  ho  says. 


II  ? 


N  Samanya-visesbhavena,  by  reason  of  the    absence  of 


Genera-Species.    ^   Cha,  and. 

12.  (Substance-ness  is  distinct  fyom  Substance,  Attribute, 
and  Action)  also  by  reason  of  the  absence  of  Genera-Species 
in  it.—  43. 

If  the  '  cl»&»  '  of  Substance-ness  be  really  identical  with  Substance, 


46  VAJ8ES1KA  PHILOSOPHY. 

etc.,  then  iu  it  will  exist  Earthness,  AVaterness,  Firenesa,  and  other 
Genera  which  arc  also  Species.  The  sense  is  that  nobody  has  th« 
perception  that  Substance-ness  is  Earth,  Water,  or  Fire.  Hence  it  is 
distinct,  etc — 12. 

Attribute-ness    not  identical  icitli     tiubstancc,  Attribute  or  Action. 
kdra.' — He  states  Attributonos.s. 

I  n  R  i  s\  \ 


Tatha,    in    like     manner,     fjnrg  Gnnesu,     in      Attributes. 
Bhavat,      from     its    existence.     3m?3f    (Junatvam,     Attribute-ness. 
Uktam,  explained. 

13.     (That    Attribute-ness    is   distinct  from  Substance,  Attri 
bute,  and  Action  is)  explained  from  its  existence  in  Attributes  __  44. 

The  meaning1  is  that  in  the  very  sumo  way  as  Existence,   Attribute- 
ness  is  explained  to  be  distinct  front  Substance.  Attribute,  and   Action 
from  its  existence  in  '/.  p.,  combination  with)  Attributes  onlv.  ___  13. 


Upaskdra.  —  He  points  out  another  <lill'urontiu  : 

^  n 


Sumanya-viseHAbhAvena,  by  reason  of  the  absence  of 
benera-bpecies.    ^  Clia,  and. 

14.  (Attribute-ness  is  distinct  from  Substance,  Attribute,  and 
Action)  also  by  reason  of  the  absence  of  Genera-Species  in  it.—  45. 

If  Attributeness  be  n«.»t  something  over  and  above  Substance,  Attri 
bute,  and  Action,  then  it,  should  be  perceived  as  containing  Substance- 
ness,  Attributeness,  and  Action-ness,  and  their  sub-classes.  This  is  the 
meaning.  —  14. 

Action-ness  not  identical  icith  tiubatanre,  Attribute,  or  Action. 

Upask&ra.  —  He  points  out  that  which  distinguishes  Action-ness  from  Substance,  Attributt 
and  Action  : 

swfsj  *Rng;  ^wf<ggrB^  n  \  i  R  ni  n 

S»Ti?g  Karmmasu,  in  Actions.  -*TT^Tc^  Bhavat,  from  its  existence.  «p*tfc«f 
Karmmatvam,  action-ness.  grE  Uktam,  explained. 

15.  (That)    Action-ness    (is    distinct  from   Substance,  Attri 
bute,  and  Action  is)  explained  from  its  existence  in  Actions.  —  46. 

Like  Existence,  Action-ness  also,  which  is  another  '  class/  is  ex 
plained  as  distinct  from  Substance,  Attribute,  and  Action  from  iti 
•xistence  in  (i.  e.,  combination  with)  Action  only.  —  15- 


KANADA  SIJTTUST,  2,  17,  47 


AliM?  f-ontinued, 

fTj>asl'irc(,  —  He  mentions  another  differentia  : 

^  II?  I 


SfunAnya-visesabhuvena,  by  reason  of  the  absence  of 
Genera-Species.  =*  Clia,  and. 

16.     (Action-ness   is   distinct   from  Substance,  Attribute,  and 
Action)  also  by  reason  of  the  absence  of  Genera-Species  in  it.—  47. 

The  meaning  is  that  if  Action-ness  be  identical  with  Substance,  et~., 
then  the  Genus-Species  of  Substanceness,  etc.,  will  combine  in  it. 

It  should  be  noted  that  these  four  aphorisms  identical  in  form,  are, 
stated  so  as  to  form  one  section  for  explaining  the  distiction  from 
Substance,  Attribute,  and  Action,  of  the  four  classes  Existence,  Subs 
tance-ness,  Attributeness,  and  Action-ness.  —  16. 

Exitence  is  one. 

Upasb'ira.  —  But  why  should  not  Existence  which  ia  present  in  substance,  Attribute  and 
Action,  be  rendered  different  by  the  difference  of  the  determinants  of  Substance-ness,  etc.  ? 
So  he  says  : 


^  Sat,  existent.  ?f?l  Iti,  this.  fagnfMhl^  Lingavisesat,  from  the 
non-particularity  or  uniformity  of  the  mark.  fsreNf^Wm^  Visesa- 
lingSbhavat,  from  the  absence  of  a  particular  or  distinctive  mark.  ^ 
Cha,  and.  w  Ekah,  One.  *n«T:  Bhavah,  Existence. 

17.  Existence  is  one,  because  of  the  uniformity  of  the  mark 
viz.,  that  it  is  existent  and  because  of  the  absence  of  any  distin 
guishing  mark.— 48. 

The  knowledge  or  the  use  of  words  in  this  form  that  it  is  existent, 
ie  the  mark  of  Existence.  And  it  is  the  same,  i.e.,  non-particularized, 
in  respect  of  Substance,  Attribute,  and  Action.  Therefore  one  and  the 
same  Existence  resides  in  them.  Otherwise,  Existence  having  the  same 
denotation  or  manifestation  as  Substance-ness,  etc,  either  it  whould  not 
exist  or  they  would  not  exist.  'Visesaliiigabhavat  Cha/ — means  that  there 
is  no  diference,  as  inference  which  is  the  mark  of  visesa,i.  e.  difference, 
does  not  here  exist.  As  in  the  judgment,  'This  lamp  ia  verily  that,' 
the  mark  of  distinction  ia  the  difference  of  measure  such  as  length, 
shortness,  etc.,  so  here  there  is  no  such  mark  of  distinction.  This  is 
the  idea. — 17. 

.  Bhdsya. — read*  T,  ii,  17,  with  the  omission  of  the  word  linga  in  vijteso,- 
Ifnyd-abhdvflt. 

Here  ends  the  second  chapter  of  the  First  Book  in  the   Commentary 
by  Saiikara.  on  the  VaiseBika  Aphorisms  of  KanAda  of  great  powers 


48  VAI&K8IKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


BOOK  SECOND—  CHAPTER  FIRST. 
Characteristics  of  Earth. 

Upaakdra.  —  The  subject-mabtor  of  the  Fir,st  chapter  of  the  Second  Book  is  the  description 
of  the  nine  Substances.  Herein  there  are  three  sections  :  description  of  Earth,  Water,  and 
Fire  ;  proof  of  God  ,-  and  inference  of  Ether.  Of  these  the  anther  states  the  characteristic  of 
Karth  which  hag  been  mentioned  first  of  all. 


Rupa-rasa-gandha-spai  sivati,    Possessed  of  Colour, 
Taste,  Smell,  and  Touch.    sM*  Prithivi,  Earth. 


1.     Earth  possesses  Colour,  Taste,  Smell,  and  Touch.  —  49. 

Manifold  Colour  such  as  blue,  yellow,  etc.,  belongs  to  Earth  alone. 
Thus  the  characteristic  is  the  possession  of  the  'class'  pervaded  by  Subs 
tance-ness  and  co-extensive  with  blue  colour.  Similarly  manifold  Taste 
such  as  bitter,  sour,  etc.,  resides  in  Earth  alone.  Thus  the  (second) 
characteristic  is  the  possession  of  the  <•  class  '  pervaded  by  Substance- 
ness  and  co-extensive  with  bitter  Taste.  In  like  manner  other  charac 
teristics  should  be  understood  by  the  substitution  or  interpolation  of 
the  words  l  sour,'  etc.  Smell  is  of  two  kinds,  fragrant  and  non-fragrant. 
Thus  the  (third)  characteristic  is  the  possession  of  the  '  class  '  pervad 
ed  by  Substance-ness  and  co-extensive  with  Smell.  It  will  be  therefore 
seen  that  Earth  is  a  Substance  which  is  the  substratum  or  location  of 
'  class  '  which  is  co-extensive  with  Smell  but  not  co-extensive  with 
£n  Attribute  which  is  not  co-extensive  with  Smell.  It  must  not  be 
objected  that  as  Smell  and  Taste  are  not  perceived  in  a  stone,  etc., 
therefore  both  of  them  fall  short  of  being  universal  here.  For,  though 
Smell  and  Taste  are  not  perceived  there  in  the  first  instance,  still 
they  are  found  to  be  present  in  their  ashes  ;  and  the  very  same  parts 
which  originate  the  stone  do  also  originate  its  ashes.  Hence  there  is 
no  want  of  universality.  How  then  is  there  such  perception  as  "  The 
air  is  fragrant,"  "  Water  mixed  with  '  Kdravella  '  (Momardica 
Charantia,  Hairy  Mordica)  is  bitter  V"  The  question  does  not  arise,  be 
cause  that  Smell  and  Taste  are  due  to  the  external  condition  formed  by 
(particles  of)  Earth.  Touch  also  which  is  neither  hot  nor  cold  and  which 
is  produced  by  the  action  of  heat,  belongs  to  Earth  only.  Thus  the 
(fourth)  characteristic  is  the  possession  of  the  'class'  pervaded  by  Sub 
stance-ness  and  co-extensive  with  Touch  produced  by  the  action  of  heat. 
And  the  quality  of  being  produced  by  the  action  of  heat,  which  is  reveal 
ed  by  a  distinctive  peculiarity,  belongs  to  the  Touch  of  Earth  alone  ; 
and  'a  distinctive  peculiarity'  is  very  manifest  in  the  peculiar  Touch  of 

the  flowers  of  Sirtsa  (Acacia  Lebbec)  and  Lavanyi  (clove-creeper)  ;  but 
it  is  not  so  in  the  Touch  of  Water,  etc.  Although  in  a  whole  made 
up  of  parts  Touch,  etc.,  are  not  produced  directly  through  the  con 
junction  of  Fire,  from  heating,  yet  there  too  a  particular  heterogeneity 
•hould  be  recognised  by  the  way  of  its  being  the  product  of  a  series 
of  parts  and  wholes. 

"  But,"  it  may  be  objected,  "  this  mark  or  characteristic  is  what 
is  called  a  mark  of  disagreement  or  a  negative  mark  which  is  the 
proof  of  its  difference  from  others  or  of  the  mode  of  its  treatment.  Now, 
Earth  is  distinguished  from  othersbecause  it  has  Smell.  That  which  is  not 


KANADA  &OTKAS  n.  i.  i.  40 


different  from  others,  does  not  possess  Smell,  e.  </.,  Water,  etc.  And 
Earth  is  what  has  Smell  which  is  the  counter-opposite  of  the  non- 
existence  of  the  porvader  of  the  non-existence  of  the  difference  from 
others  than  itself.  Therefore  it  is  different  from  others  than  itself. 
Hero  supposing  that  the  major  term,  the  quaasitum,  namely,  difference 
from  others,  is  a  well  known  object,  if  the  mark  of  inference  disagree 
with  it,  then  the  inference  will  have  the  fault  of  incommensurability,  as 
the  minor  term  will  in  that  case  fall  outside  the  class  of  ascertained 
similar  objects  and  of  un-uscertained  objects  ;  and  if  it  does  not 
disagree,  then  the  mark  will  be  what  is  called  a  mark  of  agreement 
or  a  positive  mark.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  major  term  is  not 
well  known,  then  the  minor  term  will  contain  an  -unknown  major  term. 
In  that  case  there  can  be  no  expectation,  nor  any  desire  for  inference, 
nor  again  any  inference  in  the  shape  of  knowledge  in  particular  about 
it.  Moreover,  absence  of  the  mark  or  the  middle  term  and  absence 
of  the  quEesitum  or  major  term  are  universally  related  by  agreement. 
Thus  there  will  arise  the  contradiction  that  the  absence  of  the  major 
term  will  not  have  the  characteristic  of  being  the  mark  nor  will  the 
mark  have  the  characteristic  of  being  the  absence  of  the  major  term. 
By  this  alone  the  futility  of  the  minor  premiss  is  explained,  but  not  the 
object,  the  universal  relation  of  which  has  not  been  obtained.  So  it 
has  been  said  :  "  The  faults  of  an  inference  by  disagreement  or  by  the 
method  of  difference,  are  ignorance  of  the  major  term,  contradiction, 
futility  of  the  minor  premiss,  and  proof  by  the  method  of  agreement." 
So  also  if  the  mark  is  intended  to  establish  usage.  Here  the  usage 
consists  in  being  the  object  of  reference  of  the  word  Earth,  and  that 
belongs  also  to  the  class  of  Earth-neas  and  therein  the  mark  Earthness  does 
not  exist.  Although  therefore  incommensurability  may  appear  to  exist 
here,  yet  there  is  no  incommensurability,  the  quantum  or  major  term 
being  the  characteristic  of  being  the  object  of  reference  of  the  word 
Earth,  which  is  the  occasion  of  the  significance  of  Earth-ness. 
Or  again  Earth-ness  being,  as  a  class.  proved  in  a  general 
way,  like  pot-ness,  to  be  the  occasion  of  the  significance  of  an 
accidental  word,  the  word  Earth  contains  the  occasion  of  the  signi 
ficance  of  Earthness.  If  it  contains  the  occasion  of  not  signifying 
others — not-Earth-ness, — then  as  it  appears  together  with  that  which 
is  the  occasion  of  the  significance,  it  should  be  proved  in  the  way,  vix.} 
4  That  which  is  not  so,  is  not  so.'  Thus  here  too  there  is  surely  the  fault 
of  ignorance  of  the  qusesitum,  etc." 

It  is  not  so,  the  author  replies,  difference  of  others  such  as  Water, 
etc.,  being  manifest  in  the  pot  itself,  because  the  difference,  i.  e.,  the 
mutual  non-existence  of  Air,  and  other  super-sensuous  objects  also  i* 
proved  by  sense-perception  itself  in  the  pot,  etc.,  in  as  much  as  only  the 
fitness  for  the  location  or  ground  or  substratum  governs  the  apprehen 
sion  of  mutual  non-existence,  as  is  seen  in  cases  like  "The  column  is  not 
a  piid'-Jia  (a  ghost-like  being)." 

It  should  not  be  said,  •<  This  i"  not  the  case.  Let  then  the  pot 
only  be  the  analogue  or  example.  What  is  the  use  of  a  negative  mark  ? 
Who  will  prove  in  a  roundabout  fashion  a  conclusion  arrived  at  in 
a  itraight  way  ?  "  If  the  non-negative  mark  be  not  a  mere  simulacrum. 


VAI£E$IKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


then  this  path  too  is  unobstructed  to  him  who  is  described  as  arguing 
in  a  round-about  way  ;  because  with  the  removal  of  the  fault  of 
ignorance  of  the  queesitum,  all  other  faults  which  arise  out  of  it,  are 
also  removed.  There  is  no  contradiction,  because  the  positive 
pervasion  or  the  relation  in  agreement  is  apprehended  along  with 
the  negative  relation  ur  because  the  positive  pervasion  is 
inferred  by  the  negative  pervasion.  Nor  is  there  futility  of  tho 
minor  premiss,  because  the  very  mark  of  which  the  pervasion*  has  boon 
_  obtained,  is  proved  in  tho  minor  term  ;  as  has  been  said  :  '<  Whatever 
"  relation  of  the  determinate  and  the  determinant  subsists  between 
two  existences,  just  the  reverse  of  it  is  to  be  understood  in  the  case  of 
the  corresponding  non-existences."  Usage  again  follows  from  tho 
teaching  Earth  possesses  Smell,  "  in  the  same  wav  as  what 
possesses  a^ narrow,  twisted  neck,  etc.,  is  the  object  of  reference  of  the 
word  <  pot.'  Thus  that  by  which,  anywhere  and  everywhere,  in  the  case 
of  clarified  butter,  etc.,  clay,  etc.,  the  being  the  occasion  of  the  force 
of  the  word  Earth  is  derived,  from  the  above  teaching,  in  Earth-ness  by 
means  of  the  indication,  namely,  the  possession  of  Smell,  also  operates 
as  a  negative  mark  in  this  way  that  that  which  is  not  this,  is  not  this, 
because  everything  which  possessess  Smell  is  the  object  of  reference  of 
the  word  Earth,  through  its  possession  of  Sinoll,  by  means  of  Earth- 
ness  which  is  the  occasion  of  the  force  of  the  word.  " 

The  objector  cannot  say  "  In  the  case  of  the  negative  mark    or    per 
vasion  which  will  prove  difference,  the  difference    must    be    either  diffe 
rence  in  property,  or  difference  in    nature,    i.    e.,   otherness,    or    mutual 
non-existence.     Now  it  cannot  be  the  first    two,  because  they  are  known 
by  sense  perception  itself.     Nor  can  it  be  the    third,    because   when    tho 
difference  of  non-existence  also  comes  to   bo    the    quajsitum,    its    mutual 
non-existence  is  not  present  there,  and  therefore  the    difference  of    that 
which    is    other    than    non-existence    coining    to    be    the    quantum  the 
qunesitum     is    not     found/'     For  mutual  non-existence,    of   which   the 
counter-opposite    is  non-existence,    is  also  a  quantum.     So  that  if  it  is 
something  additional  then  it  verily  exists  ;  if  not  then  being  reduced  to 
itself,    it    is    in    reality  something    different,    because    its   difference  in 
property  is  pervaded  by  its  mutual  non-existence.     And  here   there    is 
unsteadiness   or    want  of  no    finality,    because  the  non-iinality  remains 
only  so  long  as  there  is  perception   or  cognition,  whereas  in  other  cases 
iinality  is  obtained  by  perception. 

It  is  also  said  that  thirteen  kinds  of  mutual  non-existence  well 
known  in  thirteen  cases  are  jointly  proved  in  Earth.  This  is  nonsense 
because  the  knowledge  of  every  one  of  them  being  not  in  point  the 
knowledge  of  them  jointly  disappears.  Whereas  mutual  non-existence 
With  counter-opposition  determined  by  non-odorousness  should  be 
proved,  because  the  difference  of  non-existence  by  means  of  the 
difference  of  that  which  determines  counter-opposition  is  necessary  and 
bec.ause  it  has  been  already  said  that  this  difference  of  non-existence  is 
proved  by  sense-perception  in  the  pot  etc.,  also. 

If  it  is  asked  "  What  is  the  solution  in  the  case  of  Ether,  etc    ?"  the 
author  replies  that  Ether  is  difierent  from  others  than   itself,    by    being 


KANADA  SflTTBAS  II,  1,  2. 


tlie  seat  of  Sound.  Although  in  "  That  which  is  not  thus,  is  not  thus," 
and  cases  like  this,  where  the  minor  term  is  one-sided,  the  qusesitum, 
i.  e.}  the  major  term,  is  not  well  known,  still  that  which  possesses  differ 
ence  iu  property  from  something  else,  possesses  the  mutual  non-existence 
of  which  that  something  is  the  counter-opposite.  So  that  by  virtue  of  the 
pervasion  brought  into  play  in  this  general  way,  the  mutual  non-existence 
the  counter-opposite  of  which  possesses  the  absolute  non-existence  of  being 
the  seat  of  Sound,  having-  been  already  proved,  hero  it  is  only  shown 
as  being  connected  with  the  minor  term,  like  fire  being  connected  with  the 
mountain.  This  is  our  other  conclusion,  its  difference  in  quality  being 
pervaded  by  its  mutual  non-existence.  If  it  is  said  that  only  the  pos 
session  of  the  absolute  non-existence  of  being  the  seat  of  Sound  is  not 
found  in  objects  of  the  unascertained  class,  then  the  being  the  seat  of 
Sound  is  neither  the  definition  nor  the  description,  because  it  is  attacked 
with  the  fear  of  belonging  to  unascertained  objects.—  I. 

Viv-rtf  __  The  revered  Sankara  Misra  himself  knovis  what  the 
necessity  was  of  carrying  the  investigation  here,  leaving  aside  the 
possession  of  Smell,  up  to  the  possession  of  the  <  class  '  pervaded  by 
Substance-ness  co-extensive  with  Smell. 

Characteristics  of  Water. 
Ho  states  the  characteristic  of  Water  mentioned  after  Earth  : 


:  Rupa-rasa  sparftavatyalj,  possessed  of  Colour,  Taste, 
and  Touch,  sntf:  Apafo,  Waters.  %*\:  Dravah,  Fluid.  fa**!:  Snigdhah, 
Liquid,  viscid. 

2.     Waters  possess    Colour,    Taste,    and  Touch,  and  are  fluid 
and  viscid.  —  50. 

The  Colour,  Taste,  and  Touch  are  respectively  White,  Sweet,  and 
Cool  only.  Fluuiness  is  constitutional  bat  Viscidity  is  by  nature  or 
essential. 

Objection.  But  it  is  no  I.-  correct  to  say  that  the  Colour  of  Water  is 
only  White,  because  blueness  is  observed  in  the  water  of  the  river 
Yamund,  etc.  That  the  Taste  is  only  the  sweet  is  also  not  correct, 
because  acidness,  bitterness,  etc.,  are  observed  in  the  juice  of  the 
blackberry,  karavlra,  etc..  That  the  Touch  is  only  the  Cool  one 
is  also  not  proved,  because  at  mid-day  hotness  also  is  observed.  Con- 
stiutional  Fluidity  again  is  too  limited,  as  it  is  absent  in  ice,  hail-stone, 
etc.  Viscidity  also  is  not  proved  as  essential  and  is  too  wide,  as  it  is 
not  perc^ved  in  Water,  and  is  perceived  in  clarified  butter  and  other 
terrene  objects.  Moreover  Water-ness  is  not  a  class  even,  which  may 
be  the  characteristic  of  Water,  because  it  is  not  proved  on  account  of 
the  non-existence  of  that  which  will  establish  it.  Nor  is  it  proved  by 
the  characteristic  of  the  determinant  of  its  being  the  combinative 
cause.  of  Viscidity,  because  the  nature  of  Viscidity,  appearing  in  both 
the  effect  and  what  is  not  the  effect,  is  not  the  determinant  of  the  state 


52  VAI&E8IKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


of  the  river  .1  around,  etc,  is  due  to  the  condition  or  enviro 
ment  formed  by  the  receptacle,  and  whiteness  is  observed  in  ^he  Water" 

W   6n  thrU     in  th 


however  the  observation  of  the  canvas  itself  is  the  proof.     The  oria 

8'1?"^  aUd  noi;-fra^ant  Parts  »  rem4d  ^7  the  conflfct  o 
;>  Inthefcase°1fm1ai?lfold  Smell,  there  is  absence  of  proof 
the  sveetness  nch  1S  obsr 


Prn  f11 

ere  ore  te  svyeetness  ^nch  1S    observed  in    Water  immediately  after 
the  eating  of  yellow  myrobalan,  belongs  to  Water    only.     Its    manifeta 

M^m^fwT^8^01;  the  ?r°ximity  °f  S°me  P^Ucular  Substance 

sand.l  wood      Th«°lll-H    °°     "tf    "  ™ter  Brises  fpom  its  "Bociation  with 
mdalwood.     The  bitterness  that    is    perceived   immediately    after    the 

b±!g,     1  >;      ^  (a  .cucrbei-]ike  frui*)  bclo^s  to  the    JrfcaW  alone! 

because    bitterness    is    observed  in  its  parts  even  without  the  drinking 

~\Tt  tLnS^   ^  ^  1bi"~  of  the  bilious  Substancf 
at  the  tip  of  the  tongue  is  felt  there.     Hence  the  second  charac- 

bv  Snb,?a  ""          ^       °i  PT6?1011  °f  the  claSS  Wlucl1  iB  dll*ect1^  P^ded 
b.>  Substance-ness  and    which    is  co-existent    with  Taste   which    is    not 

"        °*  ier  ^'         Taste'     ^    Hke  manner  the  thirl 


claacristi       f  .  '  ner       e        r 

Jiai  actei  istic  of  water  is  the  possession  of  the  class  which  is    pervaded 
by  Substance-ness    and    which    is    co-existent   with    cool    Touch      The 


co-exsen     w         coo     Touch      The 
hotness  that  appears  at  mid-day  is  really  of  Fire,  as  it  depends  upon  its 

ourtTcliar1,   T   ST-CC-  •  ^^  """titntional  Fluidity  ?8  bv  itsdf  the 
fourth  characteristic  ;  in  other  words,   Water-ness  is  the    possession    of 
the  class  wh]ch  ls  pervaded  b     Substance-ness    and  which  ii  present  in 
what  possesses  constitutional  Fluidity.  Liquidity  or  ViscidityP  however 
-10       ^"^^    not    *    Genus  whi 


Genus  which  is 

-ness;    because    the      distinction  of       iscid 

nooaa«n  TC'1'    iS    observed,    but    such     distinction 

A?      bt        ^6ne  ?    a  I1*88'     Jt  Cannot  be  said  "  Let    Viscidity 
for  it  it  in1«±i  f         11        1S  th°  evide^ce  that  ^  is  Present  in  water  ?'' 
inferred  from  the  mixing  or  compounding    of  barley,  sand,  etc., 
A    compound   is    a    particular    combination    or    conjunction 


KANiDA  SUTRAS  II,  1,  3.  53 

caused  by  Viscidity  and  Fluidity.  It  is  not  due  to  Fluidity  alone,  "be 
cause  no  compounding  is  established  by  the  Fluidity  of  glass  or  gold  ; 
nor  is  it  due  to  Viscidity  alone,  because  no  compounding  is  established 
by  condensed  clarified  butter,  etc.  Therefore  by  the  method  of  agree 
ment  and  difference  it  is  proved  to  be  caused  by  ATiscidity  and 
Fluidity.  And  this  compounding,  being  seen  to  take  place  in  barley, 
sand,  etc.,  by  water,  confirms  Viscidity  in  Water.  This  argument  is 
based  upon  wide  experience  itself,  as  Viscidity  is  an  object  of  sense- 
perception.  Viscidity  which  however  is  found  in  clarified  butter,  etc., 
is  of  the  Water  which  is  the  occasional  cause  of  that  clarified  butter, 
and  it  appears  as  though  belonging  to  the  clarified  butter  through 
combination  with  the  conjoint.  So  also  in  the  case  of  oil,  juice,  etc. 
And  Water  which  is  the  occasional  cause  of  clarified  butter,  contains 
a  preponderance  of  Viscidity  ;  therefore  owing  to  this  very  prepon 
derance  of  Viscidity,  this  Water  does  not  counteract  Fire.  If  Viscidity 
were  a  particular  Attribute  of  Earth,  then,  like  Smell,  it  would  have 
been  present  in  all  terrene  objects,  hastly,  Water-ness  is  a  class 
which  is  directly  pervaded  by  Substanco-ness,  because  it  has  been 
proved  that  a  class  which  determines  the  being  the  combinative  cause 
of  the  conjunction  present  only  in  objects  possessing  Viscidity,  is 
common  to  the  ultimate  atoms.  —  2. 

Characteristics  of   Pire. 
a.  —  Following  the  order  o{  enumeration,  he  states  the  character  istic  of  Fire  : 


&W:  Tejas,  fire.  ^T^sjfcj  llupa-sparsavat,  possessed  of  Colour  and 
Touch. 

3.     Fire  possesses  colour  and  Touch.—  51. 

The  meaning  is  that  Fire  possesses  Colour  which  is  luminous,  and 
Touch  which  is  hot.  If  it  be  objected,  "Luminousness  is  the  being  the 
illuminator  of  other  bodies,  and  such  Colour  is  not  found  in  heat  or  in 
Fire  as  it  exists  in  gold,  in  a  frying-pan,  or  in  Water.  White  Colour 
also  is  found  nowhere  in  these,  nor  is  hot  Touch  found  in  moonlight  or 
in  gold.  How  then  is  this  so  ?"  We  reply  that  ther  can  be  no  such 
objection,  because  luminous  Colour  may  be  inferred  in  hotness,  etc., 
by  means  of  Fire-ness.  If  it  be  objected  that  Fire-ness  itself  is  not 
proved  there  as  such,  we  reply  that  it  is  inferred  in  them  by  their 
possessing  hpt  Touch.  If  it  be  asked,  "How  is  it  proved  in  gold  ?", 
our  reply  is  that  the  author  desires  to  say  that  it  is  moved  because, 
even  in  tho  absence  of  luminous  Colour  in  it,  Fire-ness  is  inferred  by 
the  negative.,  mark,  viz.,  the  characteristic  of  being  the  substratum  or 
ground  of  Fluidity  which  is  produced  but  not  destroyed  by  the  closest 
Conjunction  of  fire.  And  in  the  case  of  Fire  as  existing  in  the  frying- 
pan,  etc.,  Fire-ness  is  inferred  from  their  possession  of  hot  Touch. 

Fire  is  four-fold  :  that  in  which  both  Colour  and  Touch  are  partly 
developed,  as  the  solar,  etc.;  that  in  which  Colour  is  partly  developed 
but  Touch  is  undeveloped,  as  the  lunar;  that  in  which  both  Colour  and 
Touch  are  altogether  undeveloped,  as  the  ocular  ;  and  that  in  whioh 


54  VAL§ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY 


Colour  is  undeveloped  and  Touch  is  developed,  as  of  the  summer  season 
and  also  lire  present  in  Water,  frying-pan,  etc.  He  will  prove  the 
ocular  Fire  later  on.  —  3. 

Characteristic  of  Air. 

UpntUra.—  He  states  the  characteristic  of  Air  which  is  the  next  in  oH.r: 


nfar^  Sparsavcan,  possessed  of  Touch.     ?rn:    VAyuh,  air. 
4.     Air  possesses  Touch.  —  52. 

The  characteristic  of  Air  is  the  possession  of    tlio  -r-UcV 
with  Touch  which,  does   not  co  exist  \vith  O.lonr,  o,    tl  e    pos^'ion    o 
the  '  cl»M  ,  oo-eXi.to.t  with  Touch  wh,ch  is    neither  hot   /or  To  d    and 

cw£2±;  &  T^hS'i,  n±  ?  hHo  °Sd9t  ofii  ;fl 

not  co-exist  with    Smell,    or    the  >  • 


The  above  characirrixtic*    do  not  belong  to  Ether. 

"      I)osse'9i'"'  of  c 


I  ?  I  V,  II 


5.     These  (characteristics)  arc  not  in   Ether.—  53. 

Hero  the  root  <  -yid,  in  vidyante  '  means  to  perceive.  The  meaniu* 
hen  »  that  because  they  are  not  perceived  therefore  they  do  not  exist 
in  Ether,  and  other  substances,  either  uniformly  or  by  nature,  or  ooUeo- 
ively  or  accidentally.  If  it  bo  asked,-  How  does  the  perce,  lion  arise 
that  Ether  is  as  white  as  curd  ?"  we  reply  that  it  is  due  to  the  impression 
created  by  the  perception  of  the  white  colours  of  the  ravs  of  the  sun  If 
it  be  asked,  "  How  then  does  the  perception  arise  that  Ether  is  blue'?" 
we  reply  that  it  is  duo  to  the  impression  created  in  the  niinds  of  the 
observers  who  are  looking  at  the  radiance  of  the  emerald  rfcak  lyinff 
largely  extended  over  the  south  side  of  Sumeru  mountain.  If  has  beer 
opined  that  it  is  due  tt  the  impression  created  by  the  eye  when  after 
travelling  to  a  long  distance  it  turns  back  and  reaches  its  own  puiul 
inis  is  not  a  sound  opinion,  because  those  who  possess  jaundiced  eves 
also  have  such  impressions.  J 

From  the  perception,      •  Here  now  there  are  Colour,  etc.,"  it  cannot 

be  argued    that    Colour    and  the  three  other  Attributes  belong  to  Space 

ime  also,  because  they  have  been  already  stated  to  be  the    charac 

teristics  of  Earth,  etc.,  only  by  the  relation  of  combination  and    not    bv 

any  other  relation  also.     «  Here  now    there  is    absolute  non-existence  of 


KANiDA  SUTK  AS  II,  1,7.  55 


Colour"  —  from  this  perception  again  it  follows  that  Space  and  Time  are 
the  substrata  or  grounds  or  foundations  of  all  things.  —  5. 

Objection  t'j  Fluidity  beinij  a  characteristic  <>f  Wntcr,  answurud. 

Ui>askv.i-ut  —  If  it  be  argued  tliat  it  is  not  correct  to  say   that    Fluidity   i.s   thf    character 
istic  of  Water,  because  Fluidity  is  observed  oven  in  Earth  ;  so  he  replies  : 


i^T  Sarpir-jjatu-madliuchchhistanani,  of  clarified  butter, 
lac,  and  wax.  *jfi«TwffTl^  Agni-saEiyogat,  through  conjunction  of  Fire. 
•&&C  Dravatvam,  Fluidity.  «ffe:  Advih,  with  Waters.  SW^T  Samunyara, 
similarity,  Commonness. 

6.     The   Fluidity    of    clarified    butter,  lac,  and  wax,    through 
conjunction  with  Light  is  similar  to  that  of  Water.—  54. 

The  Fluidity  which  belongs  to  clarified  butter,  etc.,  results  from 
conjunction  of  Fire  which  is  its  occasion,  and  is  not  constitutional; 
whereas  constitutional  Fluidity  is  the  characteristic  of  Water.  There 
fore  the  similarity  of  Earth  to  Water  is  in  respect  of  mere  Fluidity, 
and  not  in  respect  of  constitutional  Fluidity  also.  Hence  the  charac 
teristic  or  the  definition  is  not  too  wide.  This  is  the  meaning.  —  6. 

Above  continued. 

Upaskdra.  —  But  still,  because  that  condition,  t.  e.,  Fluidity,  appears  in  tin,  lead,  iron, 
and  other  modifications  of  Firo,  therefore  that  condition  itself  is  an  instance  that  tho  d«- 
finition  is  too  wide.  To  this  objection  he  replies  : 


n  *  i  n  v$ 


!n*T  Trapu-sisa-loha-rajata-suvarnamim,  of  tin,  lead, 

iron,  silver,  and  gold.  SffrwtiTi^  Agnisamyogat,  through  Conjunction 
of  Fire.  ^?3  Dravatvam,  Fluidity.  *lf??:  Advih,  with  Waters.  8WI*W 
Samanyam,  similarity. 

7.     The  Fluidity  of  tin,  lead,  iron,  Silver,    and  gold,    through 
conjunction  with  Fire,  constitutes  their  similarity  to  Water,  —  55. 

This  is  an  indication  ;  bell-metal,  copper,  brass,  etc.,  are  also  im 
plied.  The  characteristic  which  is  common  to  those  which  have  been 
mentioned  and  those  which  are  implied,  is  that  they  are  the  foundation 
of  the  Fluidity  which  is  produced  but  is  not  destroyed  by  tne  closest 
Conjunction  of  Fire.  Thus  the  Fluidity  of  gold,  etc.,  also  is  only  occa 
sional,  the  occasion  which  is  the  Conjunction  of  Fire,  being  proved  by 
the  method  of  agreement  and  difference.  Moreover  there  is  this 
distinction  ;  in  the  last  aphorism  the  word  '  agni  '  denotes  Light 
—  tejas  —  possessing  an  excess  or  abundance  of  heat,  but  here  it 
denotes  fire. 

If  it  be  objected,  "  Gold,  etc.,  also  must  be  either  modifications  of 
Earth  or  different  Substances;  because  yellowness,  weight,  etc.,  establish 


PHILOSOPHY-. 


terreneness,  and  because  the  non-annihilation  of  Fluidity  which 
constitutes  their  difference  from  Earth,  is  perceived  in  them,  and  be 
cause  this  h  capable  of  establishing  of  Substance.  r  Wo  reply  that 
gold  is  a  modification  of  Fire,  and  its  fieri  ness  is  proved  in  the  negative 
way,  namely,  "  That  which  is  not  thus,  is  not  thus,  as  Earth,  "  by  the 
characteristic  of  its  being  the  foundation  of  Fluidity  which  is  not 
annihilated  oven  at  the  closest  Conjunction  of  Fire. 

Again  there  is  no  contradiction  in  the  ultimate  atoms  of  Water, 
because  Fluidity  should  bo  qualified  as  being1  non-eternal.  Nor  is  there 
incommensurability,  as  the  mark  does  not  appear  in  the  lamp  and  other 
objects  of  the  ascertained  class,  because  the  fact  which  is  to  be  proved 
is  that  gold  is  not  a  modification  of  Earth.  Nor  is  there  any  obstacle  to 
the  receptacle  of  weight  becoming  the  minor  term  hero;  the  foundation 
or  substratum  will  not  be  proved  if  something  else  were  the  minor  term, 
as  the  minor  term  must  be  foundation  of  Fluidity.  Nor  is  it  hard  to 
ascribe  ultra-finality  or  absoluteness,  because  it  is  desired  to  be  said  that 
it  is  tho  foundation  of  temporary  Fluidity  which  is  not  annihilated  even 
at  the  closest  Conjunction  of  Fire  for  three  hours.  If  it  be  objected  that 
the  annihilation  of  Fluidity  must  be  concluded  from  the  destruction  of 
the  foundation  and  the  perception  of  more  and  less;  we  reply  that  it  is 
not  so,  because  the  mark  of  inference  is  the  possession  of  the  Fluidity 
containing  the  Genus  of  Fluidity  which  does  not  appear  in  the  countei- 
opposite  of  the  annihilation  produced  by  that  Conjunction  of  Fire  which 
is  not  combined  with  the  totality  of  non-existent  Fluidity.  Or  the 
foundation  of  yellowness  and  weight,  conjoined  as  it  is  with  Fluid 
Substance  which  excludes  all  Colour  different  from  yellow  Colour,  does 
not  therefore  become  fhe  foundation  of  any  Colour  different  from  yellow 
Colour  even  at  the  Conjunction  of  Fire  for  three  hours,  like  a  piece  of 
yellow  cloth  placed  inside  Wider  which  is  conjoined  with  Fire.  If  it  be 
objected,  ''The  Colour  of  gold  will  then  be  visible  in  darkness  as 
there  will  be  nothing  to  cloud  or  overpower  its  Colour,  because, 
overpowering  means  the  non-apprehension  caused  by  the  apprehension 
of  a  more  powerful  like  object,"  we  reply  that  overpowering  denotes 
the  mere  relation  with  a  like  object  which  is  more  powerful  by  the 
power  of  the  effect  produced  by  it.  80  it  has  been  said,  u  Other  Colour 
does  not  at  all  shine  under  the  influence  of  the  association  of  the  earth.'* 
This  is  our  view.  —  7. 

Use  of  Inference. 

Upaskara.  —  Having  thus  finished  the  section  on  the  characteristic  of  the  four  Sub 
stances  which  possess  Touch,  the  author,  seeing  that  the  characteristic  of  Air  is  net 
proved  by  its  foundation  or  with  a  view  to  avoid  this,  at  the  outset  introduces  the  method 
of  ]  roof  by  inference,  and  then  first  of  ull  establishes  tho  probative  force  or  value  of 
inference  itself,  according  to  experience,  and  thereby  begins  the  section  of  demonstration 
•  >f  Air  : 


l  *  I  \  I  c  II 

Visani,  possessing  horns.  VJsH'H  Kakudvan,  possessing  a  hump. 
Prftnte-valadhih,  with  a  tail  hairy  at  the  extremity, 


KANADA  SftTRAS  II,  1,  9-  57 


Sasuavan,  possessing  a  dewlap.     ?fa    Iti,  such,    nt?^  G-otve,  in  cow-ness, 
of  being  a  CUNY,    ^f  Dristam,  observed  admitted,  fajpn  Lingam,  mark. 


8.     That  it   has  horns,  a  hump,  a  tail  hairy  at  the    extremity, 
and  a  dewlap—  such  is  the  admitted  mark  of  being  a  cow.  —  56. 

The    import  is  that  as  horns,    etc.   are  the   marks,  the  pervasion,   or 
universal  or  invariable  relation  of   which  is    well-known  or    recognised, 
towards  the  proof  of  cow-ness,  so  also  the     commonly-observed  marks  of 
the  five  super-sensuous  Substances,,  Air,  etc.,    assume  the  form  of  proof. 
Here  although  the  mere    possession  of    horns  is  not    the    mark    of    cow- 
ness,  since  it  is   also    found  in  the  buffalo,  etc.  ;  nor  is  the  possession  of 
the  dew-lap,  etc.,  the  distinction  or    differentia,  since  in    that    case    the 
name  will  become  senseless  ;  still    with    them    who  can  discern  in     the 
horn  of  the    cow    difference    in    characteristic    in     comparison  with  the 
horns  of  the  buffalo,  the  sheep,  etc.,    all    those  distinctions  truly  assume 
the    nature    of    marks.     And  all  those  distinctions  such  as  straightness, 
crookedness,    hardness,     softness,      shortness,   length,    etc.,    which    are 
capable  of  being  known  by  observers  of    superior  skill,  do    really    exist 
in  horns  also.     Thus  in  respect  of     the    body    of    a    cow    at    a    distance 
standing  by  itself,  the  inference  is    altogether    unobstructed  that  it  is  a 
cow  because   like  the  body  of  a  cow  which  has   been  previously  perceiv 
ed,  it  possesses  peculiar  horns.     Similarly,  the    possession    of    a    hump 
also    is    a    mark  of  being    a    cow.      The  possession  of  a  tail  hairy  at  the 
extremity,  is  also  a  truly  independent  mark    of    being  a  cow.    '  Prante- 
valadhib'    means  that  in  which  hair  are  placed  at    the  extremity,    that 
is,  a  particular  tail.    From  the  use  of  the  aluk  compound  (i.  c.,  that  form 
of    compound    words    in    which    the    inflection    of    the  first  word  is  not 
elided),  the  tail  of  the  cow  only  is  denoted  by  the  word  '  Antevaladhi^-' 
For  the  charaeteristic  of  the  tail  hairy  at  the  extremity,  which  is  found 
in  the  tails  of  cows,  does  not  belong  to  the  tails  of  the  horse,  sheep,  etc., 
as  these  tails  are  covered  with  hair  all  over.     In  the  tail  of  the  buffalo, 
etc.,  there  is  not  so  much  prolongation.     From  this  difference  in  charac 
teristic,  the  possession  of  a  tail  hairy  at  the  extremity  is   also    a    mark 
of  being  a  cow.     The  dropping  of  the   inflection    conveying  the  sense  of 
possession  (i.  e.,  the  use  of  the  word  tail  only    instead    of    tail-bearing) 
shows    that     only    the    body     of  the  cow  has  been  in  view.     Thus    (the 
inference)  "  It  is  a  cow"  because,  like    the  body  of  the  cow    which    has 
been  previously  perceived,  it    possesses  a    tail    which    is    hairy    at    tho 
extremity.     The  possession  of  a  dew-lap,    again,  is  simply  a  well-known 
mark  of  being  a  cow.  —  8. 

Touch  infers  Air. 

Upaskdra.'  —  'Having  thus  pointed  out,  according  to  observation,  the  probative  value  of 
Infereiioo  by  which  all  human  affairs  are  carried  on,  ho,  intending  to  begin  tie  Heotion  of 
proof  of  Air,  says: 


:    Sparsah,  Touch.     ^  Oha,  and    *T*ft:   Vayob,  of  air, 
9.     And  Touch  (is  a  mark)   of  Air.—  57. 


58  VAI&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


'  Lirigam,'  mark,  is  the    complement  of  the  aphorism.     By  the  word 
'cha  '  Sound,  upholding,  and  quivering  are  brought  forward. 

It  cannot  be  said,    "  The  Touch  which  is  being    perceived    must    be 
of  Earth  itself  of  which  the  Colour  is  not  yet     developed,"    because   the 
developed  Touch  of  Earth  cannot  be  separated  from    developed    Colour. 
Henco  the  Touch  which  is  perceived,  being  Touch,  must  reside  somewhere, 
like  the  Touch  of  Earth,  etc.  Some  foundation  of  Touch  being  thus  proved 
by  inference,  by  analogy,  (Samanyato  dristam),  the  foundation  of  Touch 
is  not  identical  with  the  triad  of  Earth,  etc.,  because  it  does  not  possess 
Colour,  nor  is  it  identical  with  the  pentad  of  Ether,   etc.,  as  it  possesses 
Touch.    Therefore  by  the  inference  together  with  the  exclusion  of  others 
a  Substance  over  and  above  the    eight    Substances    is    proved.     In    like 
manner  a  particular  Sound  also  is  a  mark  of  Air.     Thus  in    the  absence 
of    the    impact    of    Substances    possessing    Colour,  the  series  of  Sounds 
(arising  in  loaves,  etc.)  which    is   heard  amongst    leaves,    etc.,    must    be 
occasioned  by    the  impact  of  substances  possessing  Touch  and  Impetus, 
like  the  series  of  sounds  produced  in  a  drum  by    the    percussion    of    the 
drumstick,  because  it  is  a  series  of  sounds  which  is  in  relation  to  a  subs 
tance  the  parts  of  which  are  indivisible.     The  absence  of  the  impact    of 
Substances  possessing  Colour,  is,  again,    known  by    the    non-perception 
of  what  might  be  expected  or  the  co-relative.  And  from  exhaustion  that 
Substance    possessing    Touch    and    Impetus  is  verily  an  addition  to  the 
group  of  the  eight  substances.     Similarly,  a  particular    upholding    also 
is    a    mark    of    Air.     Thus  the   steadiness    or    flotation  of  grass,  cotton, 
cloud,  and  air-ship  in  the  sky,  is  due  to  the  conjunction    of    some    subs 
tance  possessing  Touch  and  Impetus,  since  it  is  the  flotation  of  substance 
which    are   not    presided  over  by  a  conscious  being,  like  the  flotation  of 
grass,  wood,  boat,  etc.,  on  a  stream  ;  whereas  in  the  flotation    of    poison, 
etc.,  caused  by  thought    directed  towards  it,   human  and  other  influence 
is  without    doubt    present.     So    also    in    the    upholding  of  the  bird,  the 
branch  of  a  tree,  etc.  Nor  is  the  distinctive  mark  not  proved  on  account 
of  its  being  influenced  by  God,  because  by  the  word  '  conscious '  all  else 
except  (rod  is  meant.     Similarly,  quivering  too  is  a    mark   of    the    exis 
tence    of    Air.     Thus    this    Action   in    grass,  etc.,  without  the  impact  of 
Substances  possessing  Colour,  is  due  to  the  impact    of    some    Substance 
possessing    Touch    and    Impetus,    because   it    is  an  Action  which  is  not 
produced  by  Weight  and  Conjunction  of  Soul  exercising    Volition,   like 
the    Action    of    a    cane-bush  when  struck  by  the  waves  of  a  river.     The 
word  l  weight  '  implies    Conjunction    of    Soul    attended    with    adristam 
(invisible  after-effects  of  past  acts),  Fluidity  and  Impression  ;  hence  the 
being  an  action  not  produced  by  them  is   the  mark. 

r  It  cannot  be  said,  "  Air  is  only  an  object  of  sense-perception  and 
that  therefore  there  is  no  need  of  the  investigation  of  its  marks  ;"  for, 
Aic  is  not  perceptible  ;  only  its  supersenusousness  is  proved  by  theinfer- 
enne  :  "  Being  a  colourless  external  Substance,  it  is  like  Ether."  It 
canot  be  replied  "  Its  perceptibility  is  inferred  in  this  way  that  being 
the  seat  of  Touch  Air  is  perceptible  like  the  water-pot ;  "  for  the  posses 
sion  of  developed  Colour  is  here  the  condition,  upddhi.  If  it  be  objected, 
"  In  the  case  of  Colour,  etc.,  as  well  as  Soul,  it  is  not  pervasive  of  the 
major  term,  since  it  pervades  the  major  term  when  the  latter  is  deter 
mined  by  the  being  the  external  substance  which  is  the  minor  term 


KANiDA  StiTRAS  II,  1-10  59 

containing  the  middle  term,  or  is  determined  by  the    middle  term  which 
is  the  moans  of  inference.     Nor  does  it  govern  a  body's    being  an  object 
of  visual  perception,  because  it  is  there  that    its    presence    and    absence 
are  observed  as  a  rule.     On  the  other  hand,  a  body's  being    an  object  of 
tactual  perception  is  governed  by  the  mere  possession    of    an    adequate 
Touch."  We  reply,  that  both  the  presence  and  absence  of  Colour  govern 
here;  for  perceptibility  only  by  means  of  Touch  proved    by    both    posi 
tive  and  negative  marks,  has  not  been  observed  without  the  perception 
of  Colour.     Moreover,  if  Air  were  an  object  of  sense-perception,  then  it 
would  govern  also  the  apprehension  of  general  Attributes,  e.y.,  Number, 
etc.     If    it    be    objected,    u  Perceptibility    does    belong     to    Number  in 
blowing    by    the  mouth,  etc.,  to  Measure  or  Extension,  e.  y.,  cubit,  span, 
etc.,  and  to  Separateness  as  well  as  to  Priority  and    Posteriority  of  two 
Airs  existing  on  both  sides.    On  the  other  hand,  it  is  not  the  rule  accor 
ding    to    you   also    that    they    are    perceptible    by  means  of  there  being 
individual  masses  of  Air,  because  they  are    not    observed  in    the    cloth, 
etc.,    lying    on  the   back."     We   reply,    that   it  is  the  rule  that  they  are 
perceived  by  means  of  there  being  individual  masses    of    Air.     Number, 
etc.,    are    obtained    in    the  cloth,    etc.,    fixed  upon  the  back,  if  they    lie 
straight  ;  if  they  are  not  obtained,  it  is  because  of  the    defect    that    the 
latter    do    not  lie    straight.     "  Developed   Colour  and  Touch  govern  the 
perceptibility  of  external  substances,    only   when  they    operate   jointly. 
Light,  the    yellow    substance    within  the  eye,   and  the  radiation  or  heat 
of  the  moon  are  not  perceptible    because    their    Touch    is  undeveloped. 
Hotness  as  in  summer,  heat  and  Watery  Substances  the  parts  of  which 
havo  been  dispersed  (steam.)  are  not  perceptible,    because  Colour  is  un 
developed  there."  This  is  the  view  of  the  commentator  of  Nyaya-Vartikaa. 
"  But  light,  etc.,  are  really  perceptible  although  Touch  is   undeveloped. 
Therefore  the  Conjunction  and  Disjunction   of  the  bird    and  the  branch 
of    the    tree    are  really  perceptible  in  the  sky  under  moonlight."   So  say 
those  who  know  the  traditions  of  the  system.     Nor  can    it    be    said    that 
the  possession  of  developed  Touch    (universally)  excites  to  the  percepti 
bility    of    universally    external    Substances,    for    then    the    light  of  the 
emerald  would  be  non-perceptible.     Nor  is   only    the   possession    of    the 
developed  distinctive  Attribute  the  governing  condition,  for  then  Ether 
too  would  become  perceptible.     Nor  again  is  the   possession  of  the  deve 
loped  distinctive  Attribute  co-existent  with    the    ensuant    or    resulting 
magnitude,  such  condition,  for    the  bilious  substance  existing  at  the  tip 
of  the  tongue  is  imperceptible  in  spite  of  the  development  or  manifesta 
tion    of    bitterness.     Therefore    only    the     possession    of    developed  or 
manifested  Colour  governs  the  perceptibility  of  all     Substances    except 
Soul.     And    this    is    not  present  in   Air.    Hence  Air  is  not  an  object  of 
tense-perception — 9. 

Touch  which  infers  Air,  cannot  be  explained  by  visible    objects. 

Upatkdra.— It  may  be  objected,  "  Here  there  ii  no  mark  which  can  be  known  by  senee- 
peroeption.  For  here  the  pervasion  or  universal  relation  is  not  obtained  by  sense  perception 
like  that  of  fire  and  smoke.  Moreover  thia  will  be  also  the  Touch  of  one  or  other  only  f 
Earth  etc."  Therefore  he  says. 


II  ^  I  t  i  *<»  u 

•r  Na,  not.     «5|  Cha,  and.  ref^t  Drigtanam,  of  the  observed  or   visibl* 


60  VAU§E§IKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


or  seen,     W$:    Sparsah,  touch.    ||?l  Iti,    hence.  Siseftn?:    A-dri$ta-lingah, 
not-containing-the-mark-of-the-visible  sfl^:    Viiyuh,  air. 

10.  And  it  is  not  the  Touch  of  the  visible  (Substances)  ; 
hence  the  mark  (of  the  inference)  of  Air  is  not  the  mark  of  the 
visible  (Substances).  —  58. 

The  Touch  which  is  made  the  subject  of  enquiry  does  not  belong  to 
visible  Substances,  viz.,  Earth,  Water,  and  .Fire,  because  it  ig  not 
accompanied  by  Colour.  Therefore  the  inference  is  that  this  Touch 
resides  somewhere.  Hence  in  virtue  of  the  middle-term,  i.  <\,  the  mark 
of  inference,  being  contained  somewhere,  we  get  Air  although  the  mark 
is  not  the  mark  of  the  visible  Substances,  i.  e.,  although  the  mark  is 
observed  in  analogous  Substances.  This  is  the  meaning.  Although 
only  the  quartet  of  observed  Touch,  etc.,  are  the  mark,  yet  because 
their  relation  with  Air  is  not  apprehended,  therefore  it  is  said  that  the 
mark  of  Air  is  7iot  the  mark  of  the  visible  Substances.  For  it  is  not 
possible  to  prove  Air  after  first  proposing  that  this  which  possesses  this 
or  that  property  is  Air.  Therefore  the  import  is  that  the  proof  of  Air  is 
by  inference  from  analogy  together  with  the  exclusion  of  (possible) 
others  (i.  e.,by  hypothesis^).  —  10. 

Air  is  a  Substance. 

Upaskdra.—H&ving  proved  Air  as  a  whole  made  up  of  parts,  which  is  the  foundation 
of  Touoh  capable  of  being  perceived,  he  says,  with  a  view  to  prove  Air  oharauterised  a« 
ultimate  atoms  : 


R  i  n  ?m 

A-dravya-vattvena,  by  not  containing  Substance  (as  iti 
support).    jf«i    Dravyam,  Substance. 

11.  Air  is  a  Substance,  because  it  does  not  contain  or  reside  in 
Substance.  —  59. 

'  Dravyavat  '  means  that  which  has  Substance  as  its  support. 
'  Adravyat/  i.  e.,  net  i  dravyavat,'  means  not  resident  in  or  suported 
by  Substance.  Thus  like  Ether,  Air  characterised  as  ultimate  atom  is 
a  Substance,  because  the  other  Predicables  reside  in  substances; 
because  it  has  been  stated  that  the  being  resident,  i.  p..  'dependence, 
applies  elsewhere  than  in  eternal  Substances,  and  because  the  origina 
tion  of  a  large  whole  made  up  of  parts  is  capable  of  being  demonstrated 
by  the  evolution  of  dyads,  etc.,  from  the  formation  of  a  dyad  by  two 
ultimate  atoms,  and  so  on.  —  11. 

Air  in  a  Substance.  —  continued. 

Upatkdra.  —  Bringing  forward  two  (more)  marks  or  grounds  of  establishing  tha   Substnuoo- 
ne«8  of  the  ultimate  atoms  of  Air,  he  says  : 


II  R  i  ?  i  ?^  II 

Kriya-vattvat,  because  of  possession     of  Action. 
Gunavattvat,  because  of  possession  of  Attribute,  ^r   Cha,  and. 

12.     (Air  is   a  substance),  also   because  it  possesses  Action 
and  Attribute.—  60, 


KAN  AD  A  StiTllAS  II,  1,  13.  6l 


'  The  ultimate  atom  of  Air  is  a  Substance'  —  this  is  the  complement 
of  the  aphorism.  Although  there  is  this  mutual  dependence  or  correla 
tion  that  Substance-ness  being  proved,  the  possession  of  Action  and  the 
possession  of  Attribute  are  also  proved  and  in  their  proof  the  proof  of 
Substanceness  lies,  yet  the  possession  of  Action  is  proved  by  this  that 
the  ultimate  atom  which  is  the  constituent  element  of  the  composite 
whole  which  is  the  foundation  of  the  Touch  which  is  being  perceived, 
cannot  be  established  otherwise  than  by  the  Conjunction  of  the  non- 
combinative  cause  ;  and  the  possession  of  Attribute  is  proved  by  the 
rule  that  the  Touch,  Colour,  etc.,  of  the  composite  whole  are  preceded  by 
like  Attributes  in  its  cause  ;  and  by  these  two  Substance-ness  also  is 
proved  ;  so  that  here  there  is  no  fault,  namely  repetition  or  vicious 
circle.  Of  these  the  possession  of  Action  extends  to  a  portion  of  the 
objects  of  the  same  ascertained  class,  while  the  possession  of  Attribute 
pervades  all  the  objects  of  the  same  ascertained  class,  which  the  posses 
sion  of  Attribute  pervades  all  the  objects  of  the  same  ascertained  class. 
The  word  '  cha  '  brings  forward  the  characteristic  of  being 
combinative  cause,  which  proves  Substance-ness. 

If  it  be  objected,  "  There  is  no  proof  (of  the  existence)  of  the 
ultimate  atoms  themselves.  Then  the  Substance-ness  of  which  is  being 
proved  ?,"  we  reply  that  by  the  maxim  of  the  division,  etc.,  of  the 
action  of  dense  effects,  a  body  which  is  being  divided  and  sub-divided 
becoming  smaller,  smallest,  etc.,  that  than  which  no  smaller  unit  can  be 
obtained,  the  same  is  the  ultimate  atom.  If  the  relation  of  part  and  whole 
wrere  unlimited,  then  it  would  follow  that  the  mountain  Suineru  and 
a  mustard  seed,  etc.,  will  have  the  same  Measure  or  Mass,  because  in 
that  case  they  would  resemble  one  another  in  possessing  infinite  parts, 
and  because  without  the  distinction  of  the  number  of  causes  (i.  e., 
constituent  elements),  measure  and  magnitude,  mass  and  volume,  do 
not  rule  the  difference  of  Measure.  It  cannot  be  said  that  this  relation 
of  part  and  whole  continues  only  up  to  the  limit  of  destruction  for  that 
which  remains  at  the  end  having  no  parts,  its  destruction  is  not 
possible  ;  and  if  it  contains  parts,  then  non-finality  will  be  the  result, 
and  its  defect  has  been  already  pointed  out.  If  it  is  said,  "  Truti 
(i.  e.,  a  minute  part)  is  the  limit,  because  it  is  visible  and  there  is  no 
reason  for  the  supposition  of  something  invisible,"  we  re-join  that  as 
it  is  a  visible  Substance  it  must  possess  extension  or  largeness  and 
many  Substances. 

Hence  as  in  the  case  of  Earth,  etc.,  so  also  in  the  case  of  Air,  the 
part  of  the  part  of  a  combination  of  three  atoms,  is  really  the  ultimate 
atom.  Thus  the  ultimate  atom  of  Air  is  proved.  —  12. 

Air  is  eternal. 

Upaakdra.  —  It  may  be  said  that  because  Air  possesses    Action   and   Attribute,   therefore, 
like  the  water-pot,  etc.,  it  should  be  inferred  to  be  non-oternal.     Hence  he  says  : 


i  R  i  \  i  \\  i) 

Adravyatvena,  by  not  residing  in  or  combininig  with  other 
Substances.  fr?q?^  Nityatvam,  oternality.     ¥*E^  Uktam,  said. 

13.     The  etemality  (of  Air)  is  evident  from  its   not    combin 
ing  with  other  Substances,—  61, 


62  VAI&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

"  Of  Air  characterised  as  ultimate  atom  "  this  is  the  complement 
of  the  aphorism.  A  Substance  is  destroyed  by  the  destruction  of  the 
one  or  the  other  of  its  combinative  and  non-combinative  causes.  But 
the  ultimate  atom  containing  no  parts,  both  of  these  causes  do  not 
belong  to  it.  Therefore  there  being  nothing  to  destroy  it,  it  is  not 
liable  to  destruction.  Where  the  possession  of  Action  and  Attribute 
is  the  cause  of  non-eternality,  there  the  possession  of  parts  is  the 
condition,  upddJii,  and  this  condition  pervades  the  major  term  which 
is  determined  by  the  Substanceness  of  the  minor  term  ;  whereas  the 
condition  which  is  pervasive  of  the  major  term  as  such,  is  the  charac 
teristic  of  being  the  counter-opposite  of  prior  non-existence.  —  13. 

Vivriti  —  Some  read  the  first  word  of  the  aphorism  as  'adravyadravy- 
atvena'  (instead  of  l  adravyatvena  '),  (meaning  "  by  its  being  a  Sub 
stance  which  does  not  contain  any  other  Substance)." 

Air  is  manifold. 

Upatkdra.  —  In  order  to  prove,  in  a  different  manner  also,  the  plurality  of  Air  which 
has  been  already  proved  in  the  proof  of  its  origination  by  the  course  of  dyas  etc.,  h« 
says  : 


H 

l:    Vflyoh,  of    Air.     su^ix^sf    Vayusainmurchchhanam,  concur 
rence  or  collision  with  Air.  iri«n?4f3r3F  Nanatva-lingam,  mark  of  diversity 

or  plurality. 

14.     The    collision   of     Air   with     Air   is   the    mark     of   its 
plurality.  —  62. 

'  VAyusaiiimurrhchanam  '  means  the  collision,  /.  e.t  a  mode  of  con 
junction,  of  two  or  more  Airs.  It  is  the  co-incidence,  the  falling  in 
together,  of  two  Airs  of  equal  Impetus,  flowing  in  opposite  directions 
and  producing  contrary  Actions.  And  it  is  inferred  from  the  flying 
upwards  of  grass,  cotton,  etc.,  because  the  flowing  upwards  and  also 
the  falling  in  together  of  two  Airs,  are  beyond  the  reach  of  the  senses, 
whereas  the  perceptible  Action  characterised  as  flying  upwards  of 
grass,  etc.,  which  are  perceptible,  is  inferred  to  be  produced  either  by 
the  impact  or  the  vibration  (i.  e.,  the  molar  or  the  molecular  movement) 
of  Substances  possessing  Touch,  and  Impetus.  Thus  the  flowing  up 
wards  of  Air  the  nature  of  which  is  to  flow  obliquely,  not  being  capable 
of  proof  or  possible  without  mutual  collision,  proves  the  mutual  colli 
sion,  the  same  being  observed  in  the  case  of  the  water  and  the  wave  of 
the  river.  Their  going  upwards  also  is  to  be  inferred  by  the  going 
upwards  of  grass,  etc.  For  the  going  upwards  of  grass,  etc.,  is  not 
possible  without  either  the  collision  or  the  internal  vibration  of 
Substances  possessing  Touch  and  Impetus.  —  14. 


No  visible  mark  of  Air. 

mar 

says 

£5 


Up&skara. — It  has  been  stated  that  the  mark  of  Air  is   not  like  the  mark   of  the   visible 
Substances.     But  how  is  it  so  ?     Hence  he  says  : 


KAN  AD  A  StiTRAS  II,  1,  16.  63 

Vayu-sannikarse,  in  contact   or    association   with     Air. 
Pratyaksabhftvat,  from  the  absence  of  perception,   re  Dristam* 
visible,  fa^  Lingam,  mark.  ^  Na,  not.  ft«I^    Vidyate,  exists. 


15,  There  being  no  preception  of  the  association  (i.  e., 
universal  relation)  with  Air,  there  is  no  visible  mark  (of  the  exis 
tence  of  Air).  —  63. 

There  the  mark  is  said  to  be  visible  where  the  universal  relation  is 
grasped  by  perception,  as  smoke  is  of  fire.  But  in  the  case  of  associa 
tion  with  Air,  there  is  no  perception  of  the  appearance  of  the  mark  in 
accompaniment  with  Air.  For  Air  itself  not  being  an  object  of  eense- 
perception,  nobody  can  have  the  perception.  "  Things  which  give 
Touch,  quivering,  etc.,  are  Air."  Therefore  the  meaning  is  that  no  such 
mark  exists  the  pervasion  of  which  can  be  grasped  by  perception.  —  15. 

Air  is  inferred  not  as  such  but  as  a  Substance  in  general. 

UpasMra.  —  How  then   can    there    be   any    infernoo   at    all  of  Air  ?     Henoe  to  strengthen 
what  lias  been  already  stated,  he  says  : 


II  R  H  I  W  II 

Samanyato-driftat,  from  the  method  of  inference  known 
as  general  inference  or  inference  by  analogy,  •g  Cha,  and  wf^K:  Avi- 
desah  not  in  particular,  General. 

16.     And,    by    inference    by  analogy,  (Air  is  proved)  not  a§  a 
particular  substance,  (but  as  Substance  only).  —  64. 

Inference  is  three-fold  :  from  cause  to  effect,  from  effect  to  cause,  and 
from  the  commonly  observed  to  the  unobserved,  or  from  analogy.  Thus 
this  Touch  which  is  being  felt,  must  reside  somewhere,  because  it  is  a 
Touch  or  because  it  is  an  Attribute.  From  this  analogy  or  common 
observation  or  experience,  accompanied  by  the  exclusion  of  other  possi 
bilities,  its  residence  in  a  Substance  in  addition  to  the  eight  Substances, 
is  proved.  This  is  the  meaning. 

It  cannot  be  said  that  the  inference  from  effect  to  cause  is  then 
gone.  For  after  the  exclusion-  of  other  possibilities,  where  analogy 
prevails,  there  proceeding  upon  the  proved  qualification  of  the  minor 
term  that  it  does  not  reside  in  the  eight  Substances,  the  proposition  that 
this)  Touch  which  does  not  reside  in  the  eight  Substances  must  reside 
somewhere,  does  not  result  except  011  the  assumption  of  its  being  resident 
in  a  Substance  in  addition  to  the  eight  Substances.  There'fore  the  pro 
posed  object  being  not  explained  otherwise,  it  is  proved  by  inference 
from  cause  to  effect  alone.  But  where  analogy  arises  from  the  appea 
rance  of  exclusion  at  the  very  beginning,  there  the  proposed  object 
results  at  last  and  the  mode  of  inference  is  found  to  be  inference  from 
effect  to  cause.  It  is  not  sound  to  hold  that  inference  from  effect  to 
cause  only  shows  the  manner,  for  in  the  case  of  being  accompanied  by 
the  exclusion  of  other  possibilities,  inference  from  cause  to  effect  itself 
comes  to  show  the  manner.  The  rule  also  that  inference  merely  shows 
the  manner  which  determines  the  pervasiveness,  is  not  valid,  for  the 
appearance  of  a  different  manner  is  possible  from  the  association  of 
particular  materials.  —  16. 


VIA&2§IKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


The  name  Air  is  derived  from  Scripture. 

nnJv°'r?Ut  if  Jt-  lH  init'I1<lc(l  to  bo  'Sftid  that  according  to  '•  not  aa   a   particular   Sub*. 
the  last  aphorism   there  is  no  inference  in  the  form,  «  This  i,s  Air,"   but    that  Air  is 
1  by  way  cf  the  mark  being  resident  in  a  Substance  in  addition  to  the  eight  Substance*, 
ien    what  is  the  evulenco  of  that  Substance  being  called  by  the  name  of  Air  ?    So  ho  eayfi  ; 


. 
e.,  the  Veda. 


)  R     \  \ 

herefore   intf**    Agamikam,    proved    by   revelation, 


17.     Therefore  the  name,  Air,  is  proved  by  the  Veda.—  65. 

Because  there  is  no  inference  in  the  particular  form,  therefore  the 
name  Air  is  proved  by  dyama,  i.  c.,  the  Veda.  This  is  the  meaning. 

Air  is  the  moving  deity,"  "  One  should  offer  a  white  goat  to  Air," 
'  And  this  Air  is  all  colour,  the  carrier  of  all  smells,  and  pure/'—  from  these 
and  other  recommendation,  which  have  acquired  the  force  of  regulations, 
the  name,  Air,  is  obtained.  As  the  name,  heaven,  is  obtained  from 
the  recommendation  <  That  which  is  not  pierced  with  pain  nor  is 
clouded  afterwards  ;"  the  name,  barley,  from  the  recommendation, 

Ine  leaves  of  all  crop-plants  fall  off  in  spring.  But  the  barley  plants 
possessing  ears  of  corn  thrive  in  it  as  if  with  joy  ;"  the  name,  cane, 
from  the  recommendation,  "  cane  is  born  in  water  ;"  and  the  name, 
bear,  from  the  recommendation,  "  cows  run  after  the  bear/'  Otherwies, 
in  the  case  of  such  instructions  as  "He  who  desires  heaven  should 
perform  sanfice,"  etc.,  in  the  non-appearance  of  the  particular 
happiness  for  the  time  being,  men  desiring  heaven  will  not  be  inclined 
towards  the  performance  of  sacrifice,  etc.  Nor  will  there  be  any 
arrest  of  activity  according  to  the  usage  of  the  Mlechchhas,  i.  e.  the 
impure,  in  respect  of  «  His  becomes  a  mess  of  barley."  "  He  kindles 

v?f  °re**ive  tire  °n  a  oane  mat'"  "  Shce  of  bear-skin,"  etc.,  for  the 
Mlechchhas  apply  the  words  barley,  bear,  and  cane,  to  yellow  paddy, 
crow,  and  black-berry  (of  jackal,)  respectively.  Thus  there  will  be  room 
for  doubt  without  those  recommendations.  Therefore  their  respective 
meanings  are  known  from  the  Veda  only.  This  is  the  import.  Only 
the  name  is  proved  by  the  Veda  ;  the  proof  of  the  Substance,  however, 
is  really  by  analogy.  —  17. 

Existence  of  God. 

».UH^?;r*ftTi^gthu8?niril!dihesecti011   °"  Air,  he  establishes  that   the   Veda  Is  th« 
by  the  All-knower,  in  order  to  answer  the  objection,  «  Is  then    the    name,  Air,  also, 
e  the  names   dtttha  and  davtttha  (i.  c.,    the  gibberish   or   abracadabra),   uttered  by    a   mad 
?   ,  and  with  a  view  to  open  the  section  on  Igvara  or  God,  he  says, 


*  I?  I  te  n 

T  SaAjfla-karmma,  name  and  effect,  g  Tit,  on  the  other  hand. 
But.  «wf|[tiiei;rf  Asmad-visistanam,  beings  distinguished  from,  other 
than,  or  superior  to  ourselves,  f^r^  Lingam,  mark. 


18.     But  name  and  effect  are  the  mark  (of   tho    existence)  of 
beings  distinguished  from  ourselves.  —  66. 


KANADA  StiTHAS  IT,  1,  19-  05 


The  word  '  tu  '  has  the  sense  of  differentiating  from  such  other 
marks  as  Touch,  etc.  i  Smjfia  '  i.  .,  name,  '  ;  karmma'  effect,  c.  </.,  Earth, 
etc.  —  -both  of  tliem  aro  the  mark^  of  the  existence  also  of  being-;-;  dis 
tinguished  from  ourselves,  namely,  Isvara  and  great  ^ages.  —  18. 

Etviatoncn  of  God.  —  continued. 
Ho  explains  how  it  i«  wo  : 

:  II  R  I  ?l  U  II 

Pratyaksa-pravrittvat  because  they  follow  from  \  orcop- 
tioii,  STITI'flSRm:'.    Samjna-karnunanali,  of  name  and  effect. 


19.     Because  name  and  effect  follow  from  perception.—  67. 

Here  also  tho  singular  form  or  the  resolution  into  one,  of  •  name 
and  '  effect/  from  the  copulative  compound  meaning  collection,  is 
intended  to  indicate  the  indentity  of  the  author  of  the  name  and  the 
author  of  the  universe.  Thus  he  only  is  competent  to  give  the  names 
'heaven,'  opjU'ya  '  (i-  <\>  that  which  was  not  before,  that  is  to  say, 
adrstam*),  etc.,  with  whom  '•  heaven/  i  fii>0.i'ca^  etc.,  are  objects  of  sensu- 
peioeption,  as  in  the  giving  tho  names,  'Chaitra.'  '  Maitra,'  etc.,  1«>  the 
bodies  of  Chaitra,  Maitra,  etc.,  which  are  perceptible,  by  their  lather 
imd  others.  >Srmlarly,  the  application  of  the  names,  pot.'  cloth/ 
etc.,  is  only  midei  tho  direction  of  Isvara.  The  word  which  has  been 
directed  by  tsvara  in  a  particular  place,  the  same  is  appropriate  there  ; 
c.  #.,  '  all  those  herbs'  which  have  been  touched  by  the  edge  of  the  mon 
goose's  tooth,  counteract  the  venom  of  the  snake.''  Such  direction  is  the 
mark.  1.  e.,  the  means  of  inference,  of  beings  distinguished  from  our 
selves.  And  tho  name,  -Alaitra/  etc.,  which  the  father  gives  to  the  son, 
that  also  is  surely  directed  by  Isvara  by  such  rules  as  vi  The  father 
should  give  a  name  (lo  the  son)  on  the  twelfth  d;iy.'J 

Thus  it  is  proved  that  naming  is  a  mark  of  tho   existence  of  Isvara. 

In  like  manner  action,  /.  u.,  effect,  also  is  a  mark  of  the  existence  of 
tsvara  ;  for,  thus,  Earth,  etc.,  must  have  a  creator,  because  the}  aro 
effects  like  a  pot,  etc. 

,  Here  Earth,  etc.,  do  not  m^an  a  product  producible  by  the  body, 
nor  a  product  producible  by  the  volition  of  another  product,  nor  a  pro 
duct  which  has  become  tho  subject-matter  of  dispute  as  to  whether  il, 
has  been  produced  by  an  agent  or  not,  nor  a  product  the  production  of 
which  by  an  agent  has  been  the  subject  of  doubt,  because  Earth,  etc., 
also  are  producible  by  the  volition  of  another  product  by  means  of 
adfista  (i.  e.,  invisible  after-effects  of  voluntary  acts),  and  because 
dispu'te  and  doubt,  being  too  wide,  do  not  determine  the  minor  term. 
.Moreover,  if  by  the  expression  that  they  have  a  creator,  it  is  meant, 
that  they  are  the  products  of  an  active  principle,  then  production 
in  question  may  be  explained  by  reference  to  ourselves,  etc.,  for  tho 
causality  of  ourselves  also  is  productive  of  Earth,  etc.,  by  means  of 
adrisf-a  (the  invisible  aftcr-olTocts  of  past  acts).  It  is  the  same  al.,o  if 
the  product  be  producible  by  an  active  principle  operating  upon  given 
materials,  for  the  acts  or  ourselves,  etc.,  also  are  relative  to  some  given 


VAISESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


•in  < _r 


material.     Then  if  the  being  effect,  on  the  other  hand,    means  the  ben." 
the  counter-opposite  of    prior    non-existence    (or    potential    existence)! 
then  it  will  include  annihilation    also.      I5ut    notwithstanding    all    this 
earth     must    have    a    creator  because  it  is  an  effect,      Here  tlie  havin  «••  a 
creator  means  the  being  the  product     <>f    an    active    principle    indepSn- 
tlc"ll.v    m •'"'•''?/"•    !llul     heing    an    effect    means  the  being  the  CM. unter- 
"pposite  of  existence  determined  by  prior    non-existence.      In    the    case 
of  sprouts,    etc.,    there    is  no    fault  of  doubtfulness  or  multifariousness, 
For  these  faults  arise  where  there  is  doubi     as    to  the   existence  or    non- 
existence  of  the  middle  term    whe-i     the  non-existence  of  the  major  teim 
to     be    ascertained  ;  for    otherwise    ail     inference    will     have    to  be 
Nor    should    it     be    said    that    this    is  the  fault  beyond  tho 
t   \\ill  entail  the  command  of  the   king  :  f,,r  it  is  not  the 
glory    or    a    fault  that    it  does  not  attack  the  minor  term.      Therefore  at 
itago  of  sprouting,  the  proof  of  the  existence  of)  the  major  term  (in 
nior  term)  by  the  mark  or  middle  term   the    universal    relation     ,,f 
ascertained,     being  unobstructed,  wheie  is  the  doubtful* 
ness  or  multifariousness  ^    And  a  fortiori  at  the  stage  of  non-sprouting, 
those  faults  verily  do  nut  exist.      Thus  in  brief. 10. 


Xi^kramauam.    egress.  SI^H    Pravesanam,  ingress,     ffa     III, 
'h.  UTITflW  Akasasya,  of    Kther    fy$    Lingam,  mark. 

20.     Egress  and  Ingress—  such  is  the  mark  (of    the    existence) 
of  Ether.—  68. 

The     word  -  it'   signifies     manner     and     brings     forward     Actions, 


, 

namely,  Throwing    upwards,    etc.,    also.      Egress    and    Ingress    are    tho 
movement    of    Substances    possessing    Touch.      Tha 


t  is    t  he  mark  of  tho 
not    an    effect.      This 

I  In    u.lmr,    n  IT    mi 


ossessng       ouc.  a      s    t    e  mark  of  tho 

existence  of  Ether,  which  is    not    an    effect.      This    is    the    view    of    the 
feankhy  n  philosophers  —  20. 


i  ?  i  ^?  n 


(as  ico 

iln.r^ombn,^^  canTT      il}8™»>  **<>'>  ^  »ot  at   all  infer    Ether   as 
••lliLrvvoid     1,          7U80>  l'^"»u  Action  <  has  but    one    Substance/ 
>*™*™\y    corporal    Substance   a,    its    oombiualivt    o 


KANADA  StJTRAS  II,  1,  23.  07 


Adion  also,  it  has  bean  already  stated,  duos  not  simultaneously    appear 
in  more    than    one    place,    nor    Joes    it    appear    in  non-corporal    Sul-s- 

t  ances.  —  21. 

Alini'i'  continual. 

r'ptxbira.—  Lost  it  mitfht  he  said  that     ogress,  ingress,  etc.,     will     i 
iion-romhinat  ive  cause,  so  he  says  : 


KAranA:ita^m.-klnptivaidli:n-niyAt.  on  account 
f  difference  from  the  characteristic    or   sign  of  .another  cause.    ^ 

an  (1. 

22.  And  also  because  they  differ  in  property  from  Un 
characteristic  of  another  (i.e.,  the  non-combinative)  cause.  —  70. 

'  Anuklripti  '  means  characteristic  or  sign,  by  the  etymology  'that 
by  which  a  thing  is  made  known/  The  meaning  is  :  on  account  of 
difference  from  that  which  is  the  characteristic  of  another  cause,  •/.  P., 
the  non-combinative  cause. 

Substance  does  not  surely  at  all  become  a  non-combinative  cause. 
Now  non-combinative  causality  arises  by  proximity  in  the  same  object 
with  the  cause,  or  by  proximity  in  the  same  object  with  the  effect.  The 
first  is  illustrated  in  the  case  of  the  colours  of  the  yarns  towards  the 
colour  of  the  cloth.  And  this  non-combinative  causality  is  calletl  'great/ 
as  it.  produces  a  larger  effect.  The  second  is  as  that  of  the  conjunction 
of  $<m"l  and  Mind  towards  knowledge,  or  cognition,  etc.  And  this 
non-combinative  causality  is  called  '  small.'  as  it  produces  a  smaller 
effect.  But  Ether  is  neither  the  combinative  cause  nor,  again,  the 
non-combinative  cause  of  egress,  ingress,  and  other  Actions.  Hence 
Action  is  not  a  mark  of  the  existence  of  Ether.  —  22. 

}'i,vrltl.  _  He  says  that  Action  does  not  infer  Ether  even  as  iis 
n  on  -combinative  cause. 

On  the  maxim  that  a  verbal  affix  signifies  an  object,  i  annklnpti 
(agroament)  means  '  anuklripta/  1.  <-.,  that  which  is  agreed  to  by  i  he 
opposite  disputants  ;  and  such  a  different  caused  is  the  non-combina 
tive  cause,  ri"..  Attribute  and  Action.  Therefore  the  meaning  is  Iliat 
oo-ress,  etc.,  do  not  warrant  the  inference  of  Ether  as  Iheir  non-coni- 
bTnative  cause,  because  difference  from  Attribute  and  Action  (  which 
are  non-combinative  causes),  in  the  form  of  Substance-ness,  exists 

in    Ether. 

77/o    (tltorr  art'  v»    marl's—  continue  d. 


?>" .-,•/.:<;/•« .—It  may  be  said,  "  Let  Ether  he  the  occasional  cause    of  Action,    for    the    move- 
its  tit'  birds  and  arrows,  etc..  are  seen  in  Elhciv'     So  In-  s-ivs  : 


H 

R 

23.     Action  is  not  produced  on  account  of  Conjunction.  -71, 


Samyogat,     on    account    of     Conjunction.     *R!f:    AbhAvah, 
non-roduction.    ^TRflJ:  Karmmanah  of  .Action. 


VAI&ESIKA   PHILOSOPHY. 


The  uou-produotion  of  Action  is  due  to  the  obstruction  of  Impetus 
Gravity,  etc.,  which  are  the  causes  of  Action,  by  Conjunction  with 
jorporal  substances,  and  is  not  due  to  the  non-existence  of  Ether 
which  is  all-pervasive.  Therefore  the  meaning  is  that  the  presence 
of  or  agruemo.it  with  Sky  which  should  be  really  explained  otherwise 
does  not  prove  that  Ether  is  the  occasional  cause  of  Action  __  23. 

Inference    of  Etlu-r  ly    tiounfl. 

UpntMyt,—  Having  thus  discredited  the    Saiikhya    view,    and  going   to    prove     Sound    w 
the  mark  of  hther  lie  prepares  OH;  ground  for  inference  by  exhaustion,  l.y  saying  : 


^KArana-giimVpflrvvakah,  preceded  by    the    Attributes 
of  the  cause,  vicqgq:  KAryya-gunah,  Attribute  of  the  effect.  &  :  Dristali, 

is  seen  or   observed. 

Tho  Attribute  of  the  offoct  is   soon    to    ho    proccdod    by 
the  Attribute  of  the  cruiso.  —  72. 

Tho  particular  Attributes  such  n.i  colour,  etc.,  which  exist  in  the 
effect  characterised  as  Earth,  etc..  are  found  to  be  preceded  by  like 
Attributes  in  their  causes.  Sound  also  is  a  particular  or  distinctive 
Attribute,  for  in  spite  of  its  being  a  '  class,'  it  is,  like  colour,  etc.. 
apprehended  by  only  one  of  the  external  senses.  Thus  the  meaning  ia 
that  such"  effect  is  not  observed  in  which  sound  preceded  by  a  like 
Attribute  in  the  couse  thereof  may  appear.  ____  21. 

Sound  not  an.  Attribute  of  tamjll>l>:  tliinya, 

Upashira.  —  It  might  bo  said  that  Sound  is  observed  in  a  lute,    flute,    tobonr,    conchsh'-ll 
d.sum.   etc.,  which   are  elleets   and  that   consequently  it  is  precod  by  a  like  Attribute  in  their 
" 

u  *  i  \  \  ^  n 


^^  c^  KAryyantarapradiirbhAvAt,     because    of     the     non- 
appearance  of  another    or   a  different  effect.    ^    ('ha,  and.  JQS^:     $abduh 
sound,  ^isnflnq;  SparflavatAra,  of  thing  possessing    Touch.  1T^:,  Aguunh, 
not  attribute. 

25.  Sound  is  not  an  Attribute  of  things  possessing  Touch, 
because  of  the  non-appearance  of  (similar)  other  effects.  —  73. 

It  would  have  bean  so,  if,  as  when  Colour,  Taste,  etc.,  are  observed 
in  yarns,  potsherd,  etc.,  other  Colour,  Taste,  etc.,  homogeneous  with  the 
former,  are  also  observed  in  a  cloth,  pot,  etc.,  so  the  congener  of  the 
sound  which  is  observed  in  the  constituent  parts  of  a  lute,  flute,  tabour, 
etc.,  were  also  observed  in  the  wholes  made  up  of  those,  •/.  P.,  Into, 
11  nte,  tabour,  etc.  But  this  is  not  the  case  ;  for,  in  fact,  it  is  seen  that 
a  lute,  etc.,  are  originated  by  constituent  parts  which  are  destitute  of 
all  Sound,  whereas  it  is  not  seen  that  a  cloth,  a  pot,  etc.,  have  their 
origin  in  yarns,  potsherds,  etc.,  which  are  destitute  of  Colour.  More 
over  if  Sound  were  a  particular  Attribute  of  tangible  things,  then  the 
relation  of  high  and  low  and  lower  tones,  etc.,  would  not  be  observed 


KAN  AD  A  StiTPvS  IT,  1,  27. 


in  it.  For  Colour,  etc.,  which  appear  in  a  single  composite  whole  are 
not  observed  to  be  varying  in  degree.  Therefore  Sound  is  not  a  dis 
tinctive  Attribute  of  tangible  tilings.—  -25. 

Bhasua.—  reads  II.  I.  25  as  two  aphorisms,  t>«.,     Also  because  of  the 
non-appearance  of  different    effects  (Kdrya-anto.ra'aprddurbhdvdt 
and  Sound  (is)  not  an  attribute  of  tangible  tilings  tfabda*  sliartawtfin 

rt/0,—  the  meaning,  however,  remaining  the  sai 

Xo>'  of  tfoid,  nor  of  ]\[lii(l. 
^a.Wra.-But,  it  might  be  ,aicl,  S«mn,l  will  he  cither  an  Attribute  of  Sou!    or  an   Attri- 

f  Mind.     So  ho  says  : 

:  n  *  I 


Paratra,  elsewhere,  with  other    objects.    aTOUI*   Samavayat   be- 
combination.  ^^^  I'ratynk.atvAt,  because  it  is  an   object  of 
-perception.     ^  Oha   and  ;  al8o.  -f  Na   not.     *W*\n<\^?  f 
an  Attribute    of  Soul.     ^  \a.  not.     ^:    N[ano-miah,  an  Atl 


Mind. 

95      Because  it  combines  with  other  objects,  and 
is    an~  object  of    sense-perception,  therefore  jiound    is   neither  an 
Attribute  of  Soul  nor  an  Attribute  of  Mind. 

If  sound  were  an  Attribute  of  Soul,  then  there  would  be  such  staten 
of  oonSsuWB  as  «  I  am  filled  (with  Air),-;  T  am    sounded/'      I  give 
out  Sound  "  etc.,  as  there  are  such  state  as  «  1  am  happy, 
1     ow  "    -  I  desire  "  etc.     But  it  is  not  the    case  ;  on    the    contrary,   the 
exnei-ieuce    of    a  1    men  is  that  a  conch-shell  is  filled  with  Air    a  lute  is 


Tl.o  f-ict  that  the  words  iHr.niu  and    manas  have  not 

The  r  ft  ore  oj  ^tlier. 
n)ff,/,(;/,,,._Ho  states  why  this  mothod  of  exhaustion  has  been  appli- 


H 


Parisesat,    from    exhaustion,    ft*  Lingam,    mark. 
Akasasva,  of  Ether. 

27/    By   the   method   of  exhaustion    (Sound)    is    the  mark  of 


70  V  AI&ES1K  A  PHILOSOPHY. 


in    tins    way    that,    being  an  Attribute,  Sound,    like  Colour,  etc.,  must 
reside  somewhere.      And  it  is  an  Attribute,    because,    like     Colour,™ 

^te±lg'So1')!l',>    •SS'<'!M>ilMC    "'    ll.eill«    "JM-ehended    by    only    one 
external    sense.      Being    non-eternal,    it  resembles  knowledge,  etcs  both 
of  which  are    combined    with    'Universal    Substances.'      And    its    no 
oternalny  will  he  shown  later  on.   The  Substance,  proved  by  exhaustSon 
•nal,as  there  ,s  no  reason  for  the  supposition   of  constituent  parts 
s  also  universal,  because  Sound  is  observed  in  a,l!  places      27. 
'/^/"-.    The    idea    ,-f    Knnfrln    is    that    Time  as  well  ns  S.-ac 


. 
really  identical  with   Kther. 


K.i./.'ct;^^ 

\^^  n  3  |  ^  i  ^  n 

Dravyatva-nityatve,     Substance-ness    and     eternalitv 
.-lyiiiui.  by  Air     s^nq^     VyAkhyate,  explained. 

28.  The  Substance-ness  and  eternalitv  of  Ether  have  been 
explained  by  (the  explanation  of  the  Substance.  ness  and  eter 
nality  of)  Air.  —76. 

As  Air  is  eternal  because  it  duos   not  possess  any    other    Siibst-inc 
as  its  combinative    cause,    so    also   is    Kthor.      As    Air    is    a    Substance 
[^possesses      Attributes,    so      also     isEthor.      This    'is  the 

l']l  In  ]•  /N  rnir,. 
r  ,»<,].,>,,  •„.—]*  i  iH.n,  ,],,.„  ulu.  ].:,h(M.  ,„.  ftro  (horo  nian    Rlhoi.s      ,rii    ]i  . 


n 

Ki  Tatt.yain,tliat-iiPHS.  O    e-ness.  rniiy.^^  BliAvona,  liy  exists 

Hie  unity  (of  lUhcr  is  explained)  by  (the  explanation    of 
the  unity  oij   Existence.-—  77. 

The  agreemont  of  tho  words  in  tlio   aphon'sn,  is    with  <  vyakhyatam  ' 
(or  explained  ),/.,,  the  same  word    as  in    the    last    aphorism,    with    ,|« 
inflection  changed.     Tho  meaning-  is    that    as  -  lU.Aval,  '  /   a     Exis  L 
is  one.  so  also  Kthor  is  only  one  and  not  man  v.—  29. 


I  R  I  ?  I  ^o  n 

«a^%Irr^q^     Sabdaling-Avisesat,    because    there    is   !10    difference 
Sound  which  ia  the    mark-  fwftawmi    VisefalingAbhivat,  beea 
there  exists  no  distinguishing  mark.    ^    CLa,  and. 


KAN  ADA   SUTRAS  II,  1,  :31.  71 


30,  (Kther  is  one),  because  there  is  no  difference  in  Sound 
\vliich  is  its  mark,  and  because  there  exists  no  other  distinguishing 
mark.  ---78. 

Tho  sense  is  that  i.lio  unity  of  Ether  is  proved.  Fthei  being 
ubiquitous  oi-  uui  versal,  all  founds  are  explained  by  their  having  that 
one  and  the  same  foundation  or  seat.  Therefore  to  suppose  a  different 
basis  will  lie  shewing  ;in  exuberance  of:  imagination.  Besides  the  very 
same  Sound  must  be  the  mark  of  the  different  I'.lther  which  is  to  be 
supposed.  ;ind  thai,  /'.  -  ..  Sound,  is  tin  differentiated  ;  nor  is  there  any 
other  mark  which  can  prove  the  differentia  or  the  difference  or 
division.  It  will  be  stated  after-wards  (III.  ii-20  )  that  ;il  though  the 
mark.  <-.'/••  knowledge,  etc.,  of  Souls  is  really  non-differentiated,  still 
the  plnralitv  of  Souls  is  proved  l»y  other  marks,  according  to 
'  difference  o[  conditions  '  or  circumstances.  —  oO. 

I'iiTitL-  Plurality  of  Souls  is  proved  by  the  differences  of  Lite 
products  "f  the  Soul,  r/.v..  pleasure  and  pain,  seeing  that  at  one  and  (lie 
same  time  an  ofl'ect  in  the  form  of  pleasure  is  produced  in  one  Soul, 
while  in  another  Soul  an  effect  in  the  form  of  pain  is  produced.  Bui, 
in  the  case  of  Fther  there  is  no  d  ifferenciation  of  Sound  which  is  its 
mark,  whereby  a  multiplicity  of  Ether  might  be  established.  Nor  is 
there  any  other  mark  which  can  establish  a  plurality  of  hither.  So 
that  no  account  of  the  alisence  of  proof,  and  no  account  of  simplicity, 
Ether  is  one  and  not  many. 

Individuality  of  Ether. 

I-.H^I-U'H.  —It  1'iuv  hi'  *;u<l.  "  L'A  unity  l>y  all  iuc;ms  Vlcm;,'  to  Klher,  LuL.  it  ,-,1,-u  h;m; 
xtreme  largencBS  as  it  is  imiver«al.  Let  Conjunction  aud  Disjunction  also  belong  to  it  as 
t  is  the  non-ooinbinativo  cause  of  Sound,  JJut  how  oau  individuality  belong  l« 


extr 

it 


'lad-jniii-bidhaiiMt.    because  it    follows    or    accompanies 
t      i  y.     q«s<Jf  V~3     Eka-prithaktvani,     separafeness     of     one 

individuality.     =4     (Mia,   aiid.     ffa    Iti.  finished 

31.  And  individuality  uiso  belongs  to  Ether,  since  indivi 
duality  follows  unity.  —  79. 

Individual'!  v  is  proved  by  this  that  individuality  regularly  gu'o 
together  with  unity.  -  'Hi  '  indicates  the  end  of  the  chapter. 

The  subject-matter  of  ihe  chapter  is  the  definition  or  statement, 
of  the  characteristics  possessing  particular  Al  tributes  and  which  are 
not  the  objocts  of  mental  perception  or  perception  by  the  internal 
organ.  Hence  the  characteristics  of  ICarth,  "Water,  Fire,  Air,  and 
Ether  and.  in  passing,  of  the  divine  Soul  also,  are  stated  in  this 
chapter.  Thus  Earth  possesses  fourt  on  Attributes,  and  these  Attribu 
tes  are  Colour.  Taste,  Smell,  Touch.  Number.  Measure.  Separateness, 
Conjunction,  Disjunction.  Priority,  Posteriority,  Gravity,  Fluidity,  and 
.Impression.  Faa-Ml  y  I  lie  same  number  of  Attributes,  with  tho^exception 
of  vSmell  and  addition  of  Viscidity,  belong  to  Y\  ater.  These  sauio 
Attributes,  with  the  exception  of  Taste,  Smell  ,  Viscidity,  and  Gravity 


VAISESIKA  PHILOSOPHY, 


belong  to  Fire,  and  with  the  exception  of  Smell,  Taste,  Colour,  Gravity, 
Viscidity,  and  Fluidity,  belong1  to  Air.  With  tlio  addition  of  Sound, 
the  five  Attributes  beginning  with  Number,  belong  to  Ether.  Only 
the  five  Attributes  beginning  with  Xumber  belong  to  Space  and  Time. 
The  live  Attributes  beginning  with  Number,  together  with  Priority, 
Posteriority,  and  Impetus,  belong  to  Mind.  The  live  Attributes 
beginning  with  Xumber,  and  Cognition,  Desire,  and  Volition  belong  to 
fsvara. — 31, 

Here  e  ids  the  iirst  chapter  of  the  second  book  in  the  Commentary 
given  by  Sankara  to  the  Vaisesika  aphorisms  of  Kanada  of  great 
powers. 

Vlci'Ui.—Tlie  subject-matter  <>f  this  chapter  is  the  delinition  of 
Substances  possessing  particular  Attributes  which  do  not  appear  in 
that  which  possesses  -  bhavana.'  i.  e.,  impression  or  meditative  tinder- 
standing.  Substances  are  the  live  elements  and  (Jod. 


KANiDA  SftTRAS  II,  2,  1.  73 


BOOK  SECOND—  CHAPTER  SECOND. 

Smell  may  be  essential  or  accidental, 

Upaskdra.—  Now  the  author  dosi  res  to  examine  the  characteristics,  such  as  Small,  etc., 
of  the  "  elements  "<  bhuta).  Therefore,  byway  of  establishing  that  Small,  eto.,  may  be 
essential  or  natural  as  well  as  accidental  or  conditional,  he  saya  : 


Puspa-vastrayoh,  of  a  flower  and  a  cloth,  tffa  Sati, 
-existing.  Qfotq*  Sannikarse,  contact.  JJUn^WJHfa:  Gunantarapra- 
•durbhavah,  non-appearance  from  another  Attribute.  fj&  Vastre,  in  the 
cloth.  iTOMmfaiF!;  Gandhfibhava-lingam,  mark  of  the  non-existence  of 
•Smell. 

1.  The  non-production  (of  the  smell  which  is  perceived  in 
the  cloth),  after  or  during  its  contact  with  a  flower,  from  the  At- 
tribnte  (of  the  constitutive  cause  of  the  cloth),  is  the  mark  of  the 
non-existence  of  smell  in  the  cloth.  —  80. 

Where  Colour,  Taste,  Smell,  and  Touch  are  produced  from  the 
corresponding  Attributes  in  the  cause,  there  they  become  essential  and 
so  acquire  the  nature  of  being  characteristic  marks,  and  not  otherwise. 
For,  the  fragrance  which  is  perceived  in  the  breeze,  or  the  cold  which 
is  perceived  in  a  tablet  of  stone,  or  the  warmth  which  is  perceived  in 
water,  does  not  become  a  characteristic.  Therefore  he  says.  4  Of  a 
flower  arid  a  cloth.'  For  the  fragrance  of  the  golden  ketaki  (Pandanus 
Odoratissimus),  which  is  perceived  in  the  cloth  when  the  cloth  has  been* 
brought  into  contact  with  the  golden  ketaM  flower,  does  not  belong  to 
the  cloth,  because  it  is  not  produced  according  to  the  (  corresponding  ) 
Attribute  of  the  cause  (  i.  e.,  yarns  ).  What,  then  ?  It  is  accidental  or 
conditional,  because  due  to  the  proximity  of  the  golden  ketaki  ;  for  the 
non-existence  of  Smell  in  the  ketaki  is  not  the  mark  of  the  non-existence 
of  Smell  in  the  cloth.  What  is  the  mark  ?  So  it  has  been  said,  "  Non- 
appearance  from  another  Attribute,"  i.  e.}  non-production  from  the 
Attribute  of  the  cause.  For,  if  the  Smell,  which  is  perceived  in  the 
cloth,  were  essential  to  it,  then  it  would  be  percieved  in  the  cloth  also 
before  the  constituent  parts,  i.  e.,  the  yarns  of  the  cloth,  are  brought 
into  contact  with  the  ketaki  •  but  it  is  not  so.  This  is  the  meaning  . 
'Thus  the  Smell  in  question  is  not  inherent  in  the  cloth,  because,  like 
•cold  and  hot  Touch,  etc.,  it  is  a  particular  Attribute  which  is  not 
produced  by  the  Attribute  of  the  constituent  parts.  —  1. 

Vivfiti.  —  It  has  been  already  stated    that  the    possession    of   Smell, 

-etc.,  are  the  marks  of    Earth,  etc.     But  this   would  not  be    proper.     For 

Smell    being   perceived   of  Air,  etc.,  combined    with  fragrant  parts,  the 

mark  becomes  too  wide.     For  this  reason  he    shows  that  the    perception. 

^of  Smell,  etc.,  in  Air,  etc.,  is  accidental. 


74  VAI£ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


Smell  is  essential  in  Earlh. 
UpatkAra.  —  He  Bays  that  essential  Small  is  tho  mark  of  Earth 


Vyavasthitah,    established.    ?fqcji     Prithivyam,    in    EarLh. 
:  Gandhah,  Smell. 

2.     Smell  is  established  in  Earth.  —  31. 

•  Established  in  the  Earth'  —  i.  c.,  determined  by  absence  of  connec 
tion  as  well  as  connection  with  other  objects.  *  The  meaning  is  that 
Smell  is  the  mark,  because  it  serves  t  >  differentiate  Earth  from  objects 
of  similar  and  dissimilar  classes.  For  Earth  has  Sme'.l  only  and  only- 
Earth  has  Smell.  It  is  therefore  established  that  Smell  which  differen 
tiates  Earth  from  the  eight  similars  beginning  with  Water,  and  th» 
five  dissimilars  beginning  with  Attribute,  is  essential  to  Earth  __  2. 

Vivriti.  —  '  Established/  i.  e.,  ascertains  1  or  undoubted,  as  there  i* 
nothing  to  oppose  it. 

Heat  may  be  essntial  or  accidental. 

Upaiklra.—  Extending   the    mode   of   establishing   Smell  IBS   an   ewswntial    Attribute,  to- 
Hotnesg  also,  which  is  the  characteristic  of  Firo,  lie  says  : 


^?U    Etena,    by     this.    i«UHl     UsnatA,    Hotness.     Warmth, 
VyakhyatA,  explained. 

3.     By  this  hontness  is  explained.  —  82. 

This  extension  or  analogy  should  be    understood    also    in    the    case- 
of  coldness,  etc.,  which  are  the  characteristics  of  Water,  etc.  —  3. 

Heat  in  essential  in  Fire. 
—  He  examines  tho  characteristic  of  Firo  : 


II  R  I  R  I  tf  II 

:   Tejasah  of  Fire.  f«:nM!   UsnatA,  Hotness. 
4.     Hotness  (is  the  charateristic)  of  Fire.  —  83. 

^The  meaning  is  that  natural  or    essential    Hotness  is  the    characte 
ristic  of  Fire.     Colour,  white  and  luminous,  is  also  implied.  _  4. 

Coldness  is  essential  in  Water. 
UpatlcAra.  —  He  examines  the  characterise  of  Water  : 

1  ^  !tfTrTrlT  II  \  \  R  {  *  II 

Apsu,  in  Waters,  jftnrni  &itata,    Coldness. 


"  Absence  of  connection  as  well'as  connection  with  other  objects."  i.  e.,  Smell  is  always- 
found  in  essential  agretment  with  Earth  and  in  essential  di/erenct  from  Non-Earth. 


KANADA  SftTRAS  II,  2,  6.  75 


5.     Coldness  (is  the  characteristic)  of  Water.  —  84. 

The  meaning  is  that  natural  or  essential  coldness  is  the  character 
istic  of  water  ;  s>  that  it  is  not  too  wide,  by  over-extending  to  a  stone- 
tablet,  sandal-wood,  etc.  Colour  and  Taste  also  are  said  to  be  the 
characteristics  of  Water  in  the  same  way  as  coldness  which  also  implies 
Viscidity  and  constitutional  Fluidity. 

It  cannot  be  asked,  "  Why  is  there  this  breach  in  the  order  of  the 
characteristics  according  to  the  enumeration  of  Earth,  etc  ?  "  Because 
it  is  intended  to  indicate  that  the  Touch  of  Fire  overcomes  or  over 
whelms  the  Touch  of  Earth  and  the  Touch  of  Water,  and  so  the  exami 
nation  of  Fire  should  of  course  come  in  between  them.  Or,  the  order  has 
not  been  observed  in  order  to  introduce  the  examination  of  Air.  Thus  it 
should  be  inferred  that  Touch,  which  is  neither  hot  nor  cold  and  is  not 
due  to  be  the  action  of  fire  or  heat,  is  essential  to  Air,  and,  as  such,  is 
its  characteristic  This  is  the  import.-  —  5. 

VLvritl.  —  The  order  of  enumeration  has  been  abandoned  with  the 
object  of  indicating  that  the  mark  of  Air,  i.  e.,  the  possession  of  a 
heterogeneous  Touch,  should  be  investigated  in  the  same  way.  The 
explanation,  given  by  the  learned  writer  of  the  Upaskara,  namely  that 
the  violation  of  tha  order  is  intended  to  show  that  the  Touch  of  Fire 
overcomes  the  Touches  of  Earth  and  Water,  is  not  satisfactory.  For  it 
is  known  to  all  that  in  gold  as  well  as  in  moon-light,  etc.,  the  Touches  of 
Earth  and  Water  overcome  the  Touch  of  Fire. 

Marks  of  Time. 

Upaskdra.  —  Thus  it  has  boon  stated  that  particular  Attributes  suoh  as  small,  etc.,  of 
tangible  things,  which  are  preceded  by  like  Attributes  in  their  causes,  are  the  oharaohteris- 
tios  of  Earth,  etc.,  Now  he  bogini  the  suction  on  the  characteristics  of  Time,  brought  in  by 
the  order  of  enumeration,  by  sayii-g  : 

R  R  K  u 


Aparasmin,  in  respect  of  that  which  is  posterior, 
Aparam,  posterior.  ^ITT^.  Yugapat,  simultaneous,  f^i  Chiram,  slow. 
f%si  Ksipram,  quick,  ifi  Iti,  such,  ^l^i^^i'l^  Kala-lingani,  marks  of 
Time. 

6.  'Posterior'  in  respect  of  that  which  is  posterior,  'simul 
taneous',  'slow,'  'quick,'  _  Such  (cognitions)  are  the  marks  of 
Time.—  85. 

The  word  '  iti  '  which  shows  the  nude  of  cognition,  relates  to  each. 
individual  word  ;  so  that  the  meaning  is  that  the  cognition  '  it  is  pos 
terior'  the  cognition  l  it  is  simultaneous,  '  the  cognition  'it  is  slow  or 
late,'  the  cognition  i  it  is  quick  or  early,'—  are  the  marks  of  Time.  By 
•'  posterior  in  respect  of  that  which  is  posterior,'  we  are  also  to  uuder 
•stand  l  prior,  in  respect  of  that  which  is  proir.'  Therefore  the  sense  is 
this  :  If  we  make  a  youth  our  point  of  view  of  starting  point,  then  the 
oog.iition  of  Priority  is  produced  in  a:i  old  man,  whosa  birth  has  been 
^distanced  by  a  large  number  of  the  revolutions  of  the  sun  ;  and  thia 


76  VAI&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


Priority  depends  upon  some  non-combinative  cause.  Now.  Colour,  etc., 
cannot  be  the  non-combinative  cause,  owing  to  their  variable  presence. 
The  three,  beginning  with  Smell,  do  not  produce  Priority  in  respect  of 
Air.  Touch  also,  rendered  different  by  the  difference  of  hot,  etc.,  is  in 
•ach  case  variable  in  its  presence.  Nor  is  a  fixed  Measure  the  non- 
combinative  cause,  for  it  does  not  originate  a  heterogeneous  object. 
Therefore  it  remains  at  last  that,  the  revolutions  of  the  sun  being 
connected  with  a  different  substratum,  conjunction  with  a  Substance 
determined  by  those  revolutions  is  really  the  required  non -combinative- 
cause.  And  that  Substance,  being  conjoint  both  with  the  lump  of  matter 
on  earth  (e.  g.,  the  body  of  a  youth)  as  well  as  the  sun,  must  be- 
universal.  If  the  characteristic  of  that  Substance  be  supposed  to  be- 
belonging  to  Ether,  then  it  would  follow  that  the  beating  of  a  drum 
at  any  place  will  produce  Sound  in  all  drums  everywhere.  Thus 
the  Conjunction  of  Time  alone,  which  is  conjoint  with  the  sun, 
with  the  lump  of  matter  in  question,  is  the  non-combinative  cause  of 
Priority.  It  is  Time  which  demonstrates  the  action  of  the  sun,  because, 
for  the  purpose  of  the  determination  of  a  different  Substance  in  the  case 
of  the  properties  of  a  different  Substance,  the  Soul  is  dependent  upon 
an  affinity  in  addition  to  its  own  propinquity,  otherwise  the  redness  of 
a  kusumbha  flower  at  Varan asi  (Benares)  would  entail  redness  in  a 
crystal  at  Patna  also.  But  Time  being  supposed  to  be  of  that  very 
nature,  this  (i.  e.,  dependence  upon  another  affinity)  is  no  fault  here. 
If  it  be  asked,  why  Time  also  would  not  transmit  colour,  we  reply,  it 
ia  because  Time  has  been  established  only  as  that  which  always 
demonstrates  action. 

In  the  same  way,  the  production  of  Posteriority  should  be  ascer 
tained  in  a  youth,  with  an  old  man  as  tl  e  starting  point.  '  Simultane 
ous'  :  '  They  are  born  simultaneously,'  They  exist  simultaneously,' 
1  They  act  simultaneously/ — in  such  cognitions,  'simultaiieously'  means 
at  the  same  time,  during  the  same  movement  of  the  sun,  in  other  words, 
at  the  same  time  as  determined  by  the  movement  of  the  sun.  It  is  not 
unconnected  movements  of  the  sun,  which  undergo  the  qualifications, 
e.  g.,  l  simultaneously  born,'  etc.  ;  nor  are  these  connected  by  their 
own  nature.  Therefore,  these  specific  cognitions  being  incapable  of  a 
different  proof,  the  Substance  which  establishes  the  specification,. 
is  Time— 6. 

Like  Air,  Time  is  a  substance,  and  is  eternal. 

UpatkAra. — It  may  be  said,   "  Let  Time   bo   proved.     But  there   is    no   proof   that    it   is 
a  Substance,  nor  that  it  is  eternal."    So  he  says  : 


II  ^  I  R  I  V3  II 

Dravyatva-nityatve,  substanceness  arid  eternality. 
VAyuna,  by  Air.  «qitqi?T  Yyakhyate,  explained. 

7.  The  Substance-ness  and  eternality  (of  Time)  are  explained 
by  (the  explanation  of  the  Substance-ness  and  eternality  of) 
Air.— 86. 

The  meaning  is  that,  as  the  ultimate  atom  of    Air   is   a    Substance,, 


KANADA  SfrTRAS  II,  2,8.  77 


1  ecause  it    possesses    Attributes,    and    is   eternal,    because  it  is  a  Sub 
stance  which  does  not  contain  any  other  Substance,  so  also  is  Time.  —  7. 

Like  Existence,  Time  is  one. 

UpaskAra.  —  "  Even  then,"  it  may  be  said,  "  there  may    bo    a  plurality    of  Times."    So  h* 
nays  : 


II  R  i  ^  i  s  11 

Tattvam,  unity.     «Tl^«f  Bhtivena,  by  Existence. 

8.     The    unity  (of  Time  is  explained),  by  (the  explanation  of 
the  unity  of)  Existence.  —  87. 

The  aphorism  has  grammatical  connection  with  the  word 
*  vyakhyfite  '  in  the  last  aphorism,  reduced  to  the  form  '  vyakhyatam/ 
The  meaning  is  :  Time,  like  Existence,  is  one,  because,  in  spite  of 
their  multiplicity,  the  marks  of  Time,  viz.,  the  cognition  '  it  is  slow  or 
late,'  etc.,  are  the  same  in  all  places,  and  because  no  distinguishing- 
mark,  like  those  of  Souls,  exists. 

It  may  be  objected,  "  Time  is  manifold  according  to  the  difference 
of  moments,  two-moments,  hours,  three-hours,  days,  days-and-nights^ 
fortnights,  months,  seasons,  half-years,  years,  etc.  How  then  can  it  be 
one  '?"  We  reply  that  ii  is  not  so,  because  the  appearance  of  difference 
is  due  to  upddhi  or  an  external  condition.  For,  it  is  found,  that  as  the 
self-same  crystal  appears  to  be  different  according  to  the  reflection 
thrown  upon  it  by  the  external  condition  or  upddhi  of  a  China  rose, 
tdpinja  (Xanthochymus  Pictorius),  etc.,  so  also  does  the  one 
and  indivisible  Time  appear  to  be  different  according  to  the  limit  set 
by  the  movement  of  the  Sun,  etc.,  as  well  as  according  to  the  limit 
imposed  by  their  respective  effects.  Thus  moment  (ksana)  is  the- 
external  condition  of  Time,  which  does  not  pervade  or  cover  another 
external  condition  of  Time,  or  it  is  Time  which  is  not  the  receptacle  of 
the  counter-opposite  of  the  prior  as  well  as  posterior  non-existence  of 
what  is  placed  or  contained  in  it  ;  and  this  should  be  understood  from. 
the  production  of  something  and  the  destruction  of  something  at  every 
moment.  It  is  proved  by  the  Veda  that  a  i  lava/  is  an  aggregate  of 
two  moments,  and  so  on. 

"  Yet,"  it  may  be  objected,"  "  Time  must  be  at  least  three-fold, 
according  to  the  difference  of  the  past,  the  future,  and  the  present  ;  for 
it  is  heard,  '  The  three  times  return,'  <  The  three  Times  are  not  accom 
plished  or  proved,'  etc."  We  reply,  it  is  not,  for  the  use  of  three-fold 
Time  is  due  to  the  limits  of  (the  existence  of)  a  thing,  its  prior  non-exis 
tence,  and  its  total  destruction.  The  Time  which  is  determined  or  deli 
mited  by  a  thing,  is  its  present  ;  the  Time  which  is  delimited  by  they 
prior  non-existonce  of  a  thing,  is  its  future  ;  and  the  Time  which  ia 
delimited  by  the  total  destruction  of  a  thing,  is  its  past.  Thus  the  use 
of  the  threefoldness  of  Time  depends  upon  thethreefoldness  of  tho  deter 
minant  or  that  which  delimits.  —  8. 

Time,  a  cause  of  non-eternal  Substances. 
a.—'H.fire  he  says  that  Time  is  the  oaue*  of  all  that  is  produced. 


VAT£ES..:A  PHILOSOPHY. 


n  *  R  mi 

Nityogu,  in  eternal  Substances.  SHT^  Abhavat,  because  it  does 
not  exist.      *f<?4!J    Anityesu,   in  non-eternal    Substances,  u  sr  q;    Bhfivat 
Because  it  exists.    «cir$  Orane,   in    tho    cause.    *i«il*<n    KalnkhyA,    the 
name  of  Timo.    ffa    Iti,  he:ice. 

9.  The  name  Time  is  applicable  to  a  cause,  inasmuch  as  it 
does  not  exist  in  eternal  substances  and  exists  in  non-eternal 
substances.—  88. 

The  word  '  iti  '  is  used  in  the  sense  of  '  be.-auso.'  For  this  roaso-i 
the  name  Tim9  is  applicable  to  <  cause,'  i.  e.,  tho  cause  of  all  that  i* 
produced.  He  states  the  reason  :—  "  Because  it  does  not  exist  i-i  eter 
nals,  aid  because  it  exists  in  non-eternals."  The  meaning  is  this  : 
cause  in  tho  case  of  the  eternals  such  as  Ether,  etc.,  there  do  not 
arise  the  cognition,  "  produced  simultaneously,"  «  produced  slowly  or 
ate/'  "produced  quickly  or  early,"  "produced  now,"  "produced  during 
the  day,  '  *•  produced  at  night,"  etc.,  whereas  cognitions  of  simultaneity 
etc.,  do  arise  in  the  case  of  tho  non-eternals  such  as  the  pot,  cloth  etc 
therefore,  by  the  methods  of  agreement  as  well  as  difference,  Time  is 
proved  to  be  a  cause.  It  is  to  be  understood  that  Timo  is  tho  occasional 
or  efficient  cause  of  all  that  is  produced,  not  only  in  virtue  of  the  cogni 
tions  of  simultaneity,  etc.,  but  also  in  virtue  of  the  application  of  the 
terms,  hibernal,  vernal,  pluvial,  etc.,  to  flowers,  fruits,  etc.—  9. 


i.—In  fact,  scriptural  texts  such  as  "  All  is  produced  from 
Time,"  etc.,  are  proof  that  Time  is  the  cause  of  every  thing  that  is 
an  effect. 

Mark  of  /Space. 

Upaskdra.—  Having  finished   the   section    on    the    mark    of   Time,  ami  goin,-  to  ba  'in  the 
-aeotion  on  the  mark  of  Spaoo,  he  says  : 


f  <T 


HO  || 


in:  Itah,  from  this,    j^  Idam,  this,  ifr  Iti,  such.  q<:  Yatali,  whence 
If  q;  Tat,  that.  ft*q"  Disyam,  relating  to  Space.  ftf^flC  Lifigam,   mark. 


10,  That  which  gives  rise  to  such  (cognition  and  usage)  as 
"This  (is  remote,  etc.)  from  this,"  —  (the  same  is)  the  mark  of 
Space.  —  89. 

1  Disyam'  —  that  which  belongs  to  Space,  i.  e.,  is  the  mark  of  the  in 
ference  of  Space.  The  meaning  is  this  :  '  Space  '  is  that  substance 
4  from  which/  in  respect  of  two  simulaneously  existing  bodies  which  are 
also  fixed  in  (direction)  and  place,  '  such  '  ..cognition  and  usage  arise 
that  '  this/  i-  e.,  the  ground  or  substratum  of  the  conjunctions  of  a  com- 
partively  large  number  of  conjoint  things,  is  prior  '  to/  (other  than  or 
distinct  from)  this  i.  e.,  the  substratum  of  the  conjunctions  of  a  com 
paratively  small  number  of  conjoint  -things,  and  also  that  '  this/  i.e., 
the  substratum  of  the  comparative  smallness  in  number  of  the  conjunc 
tions  of  the  conjoint,  is  'posterior  '  to  '  this'/  iS-to,  the  substratum  of  the 


KANADA  StiTRAS  II,  2,  10.  70 

comparative  largeness  in  number  of  the  conjunctions  of  the  conjoint^ 
For,  without  the  existence  of  such  a  substance,  there  is  no  other  means- 
of  establishing  a  comparatively  large  or  small  number  of  the  conjunc 
tions  of  the  conjoint  in  the  two  bodies  ;  nor,  without  such  establishment,, 
can  there  be  any  particular  or  concrete  understanding  about  them  res 
pectively  ;  nor,  without  such  understanding,  can  Priority  and  Posteri 
ority  arise  ;  nor,  without  their  appearance,  can.  there  be  concrete 
cognition  and  usage  about  them. 

It  cannot  be  said,  "  Let  Time  be  the  means  also  of  establishing  the 
conjunctions.  What  is  the  use  of  another  Substance?"  For  Time  is 
proved  only  as  the  means  of  establishing  constant  or  unchaiigeable 
actions.  If,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  supposed  to  be  the  means  of  establish 
ing  the  inconstant  or  changing  property  of  Remoteness,  then  it  would 
establish  the  colouring  of  the  paste  of  the  saffron  of  Kasmira  (Cashmere) 
on  the  breasts  of  the  women  of  Karnata  (the  Carnatic).  The  same  will 
be  the  implication  if  Ether  and  Soul  also  are  similarly  made  to  be  the 
means  of  communicating  the  prcperty  of  Remoteness.  Whereas  Space 
being  proved  only  as  the  invariable  means  of  communicating  the  pro 
perty  (  f  Remoteness,  there  is  no  such  absurd  implication.  In  this  way 
Space,  which  establishes  conjunctions,  is  really  separate  from  Time,, 
which  establishes  actions. 

Moreover,  these  cognitions,  namely  "  This  is  east  of  that/'  "  This- 
is  south  of  that,"  "  This  is  west  of  that,"  "  This  is  north  of  that/' 
"  This  is  soufh-east  of  that/'  This  is  south-west  of  that/'  "  This  is  north 
west  of  that,"  "  This  is  north-east  of  that,"  "  This  is  below  that/'  "This, 
is  above  that," — are  brought  together  by  the  statement  "  This  from 
this,"  because  it  is  not  possible  for  these  cognitions  to  have  another 
occasional  or  efficient  cause.  Further,  Time  establishes  external  con- 
ditiors  or  upddhis  which  are  constant,  while  Space  establishes  external 
conditions  or  upddhis  which  are  not  constant.  For,  when  one  thing 
is  '  present  '  (in  Time)  with  reference  to  another  thing,  that  other 
thing  also  is  l  present  '  with  reference  to  the  former  :  but  in  the  case 
of  the  external  condition  OP  upddhi  of  Space,  there  is  no  such  rule  or 
fixity,  because  that  which  is  east  in  relation  to  a  person,  the  very 
name  sometime  becomes  west  in  relation  to  the  same  person.  The  same 
is  to  be  observed  with  regard  to  north,  ete.,  also.  The  direction  or 
quarter  which  is  nearer  to  the  mountain  whereon  the  sun  rises,  with 
reference  to  another  direction,  is  east  in  relation  to  the  latter  ;  the 
direction  which  is  nearer  to  the  mountain  whereon  the  sun 
sets,  with  reference  to  another  direction,  is  west  in  relation  to  th» 
latter.  Nearness,  again,  is  the  fewness  of  the  conjunctions  of  the 
conjoint  ;  and  these  conjunctions  with  the  sun,  whether  they  be  a  few 
or  many,  are  to  be  established  by  Space.  In  like  manner,  the  direc 
tion,  which  is  determined  by  the  portion  of  Space  falling  on  the  left 
of  a  person  facing  towards  east,  is  north  ;  the  direction  determined  by 
the  right  division  of  such  a  person,  is  south  ;  while  Tightness  and  left- 
ness  are  particular  <  classes  '  residing  in  the  constituent  parts  of  the 
body.  The  direction,  which  is  the  support  of  the  conjunction  which  is 
produced  by  an  act  of  which  Weight  is  the  nou-combinative  cause,  is 
below  ;  and  the  direction,  which  is  the  support  of  the  con  junction  which 
ia  produced  by  the  conjunction  of  Soul  possessing  adrigtam  (invisblfr 


VAI&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


consequences  of  conduct)  or  by  the  action  of  fire,  is  above.  In  this 
way,  from  their  reference  as  east,  etc.,  they  are  also  otherwise  referred 
to,  as  m  the  statement,  "  Directions  are  ten  in  number,  as  marked  out 
by  their  being  presided  over  by  Indra,  Agni,  Yama,  Nirrita,  Varuna 
Vayu,  boma,  iSina,  Naga,  and  Brahma."  _  10. 

Like   Air,  Space  is  a  Substance,  and  is  eternal. 

1  also  eternality  b3long  to  Sijac°  in  thc 


n  R  i  ??  n 

Dravyatva-nityatve,     Substance-ness     and    eternality. 
Vayuna,  by  Air.  sq^gi^f  Vyakhayute,  explained. 


11.  The  substanceness  and  eternality  (of  Space  are)  explained 
by  (the  explanation  of  the  Substance-ness  and  eternality  of) 
Air.—  90. 

The  meaning  is  that  it  possesses  Substance-ness,  because  it  posses 
ses  Attributes,  and  eternality,  because  it  is  independent  of  or  non 
resident  in  any  other  substance.  —  11. 

Like  Existence,  Space  is  one. 
Upaskdra.  —  Extending  or  attributing  unity  (to  Space),  he  says  : 


n  ^  \  \  i  n  n 

Tattvam,  unity.  *Tl«fr  Bhavena,  by  Existence. 

12.     The  unity  (of  space  is  explained)  by  (the  explanation    of 
the  unity  of)  Existence.  —  91. 

Unity  is  proved  in  Space,  as  in  Existence,  by  the  absence  of  differ 
ence  in  the  marks  of  Space  together  with  the  non-existence  of  any 
•differentiating  mark.  Separateness.  of  one,  i.  e.,  individuality,  also 
belongs  to  Space,  because  individuality  constantly  follows  unity.  —  12. 

Bhdsya.  —  According  to  Kandda,  it  appears,  there  is  but  one  Subs 
tance,  variously  called  as  Ether,  Time,  and  Space.  For,  he  has  take:i 
much  pain  to  establish  the  difference  of  Ether  from  tangible  things, 
Self,  and  Mind,  but  he  has  made  no  attempt  to  prove  the  difference  of 
Ether  from  Time  and  Space  as  well.  Nor  has  he  attempted  to  prove  the 
difference  of  Time  and  Space  themselves  from  any  other  Substance.  It 
may  be,  therefore,  considered  that  with  the  difference  of  Ether,  the 
difference  of  Time  and  Space  also  has  been  established.  But  it  may  be 
asked,  if  there  be  one  Substance  only,  how  does  it  come  to  be  variously 
called  as  Ether,  Time,  and  Space  ?  He  replies  that  this  is  due  to  the 
variety  of  effects  produced  by  it  (II  ii.  13)  and  also  to  the  variety  ol 
external  conditions  attending  it  (II,  ii,  14,  15,  and  16.) 

Above  continued. 

Upasklra.—It  may  be  asked,  "  If  Space  is  only  one,  how  then  can  there  b3  its   cognition 
use  as  ten  quartern  or  directions  ?,    So  ho  sayj  :—  • 


KANiDA  StTTRAS  II,  1,  15.  81 


II 

Kuryya-visosena,    owing  to    difference  or    distinction  of 
effects,  'Tilled  Nanatvain,  multiplicity  or  diversity. 


13.     The    diversity    (of    Space)    is    due    to    the    difference  of 
effect—  92. 

The  meaning    is    that    the    attribution    of  multiplicity  is  due  to  the 
divergence  of  effects.  —  13. 

Directions  explained. 
Vpaskdra.  —  Showing  the  aforesaid  divergence  of  effects,  he  says  :     . 


Aditya-sa£ayogut,    from    the    conjunction    of    th.3   sun. 
^  Bhuta-purvvat,    past     and    gone,    vffsfsqff:  Bhayisyatah,    future. 
Bhutfit,  what  has  taken  place  or  come  into   existence  ;    present.    ^ 
Cha,  and.    Ri^ft,  Prachi,  east  (lit.   Orient). 

14.     (The    direction    comes  to  be  regarded  as)  the  east,  from 
the  past,  future,  or  present  conjunction  of  the  sun  —  93. 

The  east  (prfichi)  is  so  called,  because  the  sun  first  (prak)  moves 
(anchati)  there.  Thus  that  direction  is  called  the  east,  wherein  the  first 
conjunction  of  the  sun  took  place,  or  will  take  place,  or  is  taking  place 
in  the  course  of  its  circulation  round  Mount  Meru. 

Here  the  reference  to  the  three  times  rests  upon  the  difference,  of 
the  conceptions  of  the  present  (i.  e.,  the  observer).  For  with  some  one 
on  the  morning  of  the  previous  day,  the  conjunction  of  the  sun  first 
took  place  in  this  direction  ;  therefore  it  is  the  east  ;  so  the  use  of  the 
word,  east.  With  some  other,  the  next  day,  the  conjunction  of  the  sun 
will  first  take  place  in  this  direction  ;  so,  in  view  of  this,  the  use  of  the 
word,  east.  With  some  other,  again,  at  this  moment,  the  conjunction 
of  the  sun  is  taking  place  in  this  direction  ;  so,  in  view  of  this,  the  use 
of  the  wcrd,  east.  In  the  word,  l  bhutat,'  the  affix,  l  kta/  is  used  in  the 
sense  of  incipient  action.  Therefore,  no  fixed  point  being  invariably 
necessary,  the  repetition  of  the  use  of  the  word,  east,  is  proved  also  in 
those  cases,  even  where  tbere  is  no  conjunction  of  the  sun,  as  at  night, 
or  at  mid-day,  etc.  This  is  the  import.  —  14. 

Above  continued. 

Upaskdra.—  Extending   the   same   method     to  the   use   of     the     other     directions     also; 
he  says  : 


?T»-11  Tatha,    similarly.   ^f%UTl  Daksina,    south.    R?fH),    Pratichi,  west. 
Udichi,  north.     ^    Cha,    also. 

15.     South,   West,   and     North   also   are  similarly    (dis-tin- 
guished).—  94. 


82  VA1§ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


In  the  very  same  way,  the  use  of  the  term,  South,  arises  from  the 
past,  or  future,  or  present  conjunction  of  the  sun  with  the  mountain 
situated  in  the  south  direction.  The  use  of  the  \Yest  and  North  also 
is  to  be  similarly  understood.  Kightness  and  leftness  (have  their 
technical  or  recognised  meanings,  or)  have  been  explained  above.  —  15. 

Aliovr   continued. 

Vpask'tra.  —  Extending    the    very    same    method    to    the    intervals    of    direction    also, 
he  lays  : 


Etena,  by  this.  f;Ji?f'l?nf*,   Digantaralani,  intervals  of  Space  or 
Direction.   *tff??Jl?Tlfr,    N^yakhyatani,  explained. 

16.     By  this,  the  intervals  of  direction  are  explained.—  95. 

The  use  of  South-East  arises  from  the  intermixture  of  the  mark 
of  the  East  and.  the  South  direction.  Suuth-West,  West-North,  and 
North-East  are  to  be  similarly  understood. 

It  has  been  explained  at  length  in  Kantida-Raliasyam  (lit-,  the 
secret  of  Kauada)  that  Space  or  Direction  is  that  universal  Substance 
by  which  the  above  conjunctions  of  the  sun  are  established.  —  16. 

Cause*  of  .Doubt  or  Disbelief. 

UpatMra.  —  It  has  been  already  established  that  the  characteristics,  e.  g.  Colour,  etc., 
of  the  four  '  elements  '  are  essential,  if  they  are  preceded  by  like  Attributes  in  their  causes, 
and  if  not,  then  they  are  conditional  or  accidental.  The  marks  of  the  '  universal  substances*' 
which  are  devoid  of  any  distinctive  Attribute,  have  also  been  stated.  Now,  the  mark  of 
Ether,  »'.  e.y  Sound,  should  bo  examined.  And  hero  wo  meet  with  the  contradictory  conclu 
sions  of  the  Tantrikas.  Some  say  that  Sound  is  a  Substance,  and  some  call  it  an  Attribute. 
Even  when  they  call  it  an  Attribute,  it  is  eternal  according  to  soive,  while  according  to  others 
it  is  non-eternal.  Others,  again,  distinguish  even  in  Sound  another  Sound,  which  they  call 
by  the  name,  ">9?>&ota."  Accordingly,  to  begin  the  examination  of  Sound,  he  first  of  all 
establishes  Doubt  itself,  which  is  the  first  element  or  momb«r  of  an  examination,  by  its 
characteristic  and  cause,  and  says  : 


IR  R  I 

Samanya-pratyaksat,  from  the  perception  of  the  Genus 
or  g*  3ral  property.  fejfaltWsncT  Visesapratyaksat,  from  the  non-precep- 
tion  of  the  Species  or  special  property  or  differentia,  fsra^pj^:,  ViSesa- 
smriteh,  from  the  recollection  of  particulars,  i.  e,.,  alternatives.  "9,  Cha, 
and.  ^1:  Samsayah,  doubt. 


17.  Doubt  arises  from  the  perception  of  (the  object  contain 
ing)  the  general  property,  the  non-perception  of  the  differentia,  and 
the  recollection  of  the  alternatives,  all  at  once  or  in  one  act  of 
thought.  —  96. 

'  Samanyapratyaksat  '  means  from  the  perception,  i.  e.,  apprehen 
sion,  of  the  object  which  possesses  the  general  property,  the  affix 
*  matup,'  signifying  possession,  having  been  elided.  'Visesapratyaksat' 
means  from  the  non-perception  or  non-apprehension  of  the  property 
which  is  the  means  of  mutual  differentiation,  e.  g.,  crooked,  hollow,  etc., 


KANADA  SUTRAS  II,  1,  17.  83 


and  also  head,  hand,  etc.  '  Visesasmriteh  '  means  from  tlie  recollec 
tion  of  the  particulars,  i.  t>,.,  the  alternatives  characterised  as  a  trunk 
and  as  a  person.  Recollection  also  includes  apprehension  by  sense, 
because,  in  some  instances,  bodies  which  are  being  perceived  also 
become  the  alternatives.  The  word  l  cha  '  brings  together  adfiatam 
(invisible  consequences  of  voluntary  conduct)  etc.,  which  are  also  the 
causes  of  Doubt. 

It  has  not  been  said  that  an  individual  or  particular  property  is  the 
source  of  uncertain  knowledge.  Nor  has  it  been  said  that  a  particular  or 
special  property,  being  the  means  of  discrimination,  is  such  a  cause, 
and  that  this  differenciation  from  similar  and  dissimilar  objects  is 
really  the  common  property.  Contradiction,  again,  consists  of  two 
propositions  arising  from  two  opposite  conclusions  ;  one  being  '  Sound 
is  eternal/  and  the  other  being  'Sound  is  non-eternal.'  Both  of  them  as 
well  as  both  the  forms  of  knowledge  produced  by  them,  do  not  together 
become  the  source  of  Doubt,  since  they  do  not  exist  simultaneously. 
Hence  it  has  not  been  separately  stated  that  there  the  cause  of  Doubt 
is  either  the  non-common  property,  such  as  Soundness,  or  the 
common  property,  such  as  the  being  existent,  the  being  the  subject  of 
proof,  etc. 

Uncertain  knowledge  finds  no  place  in  the  kindred  system  of 
Gautama  (i.  e.,  Nyaya  Philosophy),  and  so  a  non-common  property 
has  been  mentioned  there  as  a  cause  of  Doubt.  Contradiction,  i.  e., 
two  opposite  propositions,  containing  as  a  rule  a  positive  and  a 
negative  statement,  has  been'mentioned  as  a  cause  of  Doubt.  In  the 
commentary  on  Nyaya,  Doubt  has  been  described  as  five-fold,  accord 
ing  ay  the  fact  that  something  is  being  perceived,  or  the  fact  that 
something  is  not  being  perceived,  is  the  cause  of  Doubt.  Thua 
Doubts  may  arise  whether  what  is  being  perceived  be  existent, 
whether  what  is  being  perceived  be  non-existent,  whether  this 
thing  which  is  being  perceived  be  existent  or  non-existent,  whether 
what  is  not  being  perceived  be  existent,  such  as  a  radish,  a  latch, 
etc.,  and  whether  what  is  not  being  perceived  be  non-existent,  at 
a  lotus  in  the  air.  But  all  these  are  really  of  the  same  kind,  being 
explained  in  the  very  same  way  by  the  expression  '  from  the  perception 
of  the  common  property.'  Again,  the  three-foldness  of  Doubt,  according 
to  differences  in  its  cause,  as  taught  in  the  Nyaya-Yarttika,  is  also  not 
possible,  as  tbe  three,  viz.,  common  property,  etc.,  themselves  cannot  be 
causes  on.  account  of  their  variability.  For  heterogeneity  should  not 
be  supposed  here,  like  heterogeneity  in  fire  produced  from  grass  ;  a 
strike-stick  (arani)  (i.  e.,  where  fire  is  kindled  by  striking  two  sticks 
against  each  other),  and  a  gem,  because  ex  hypothesi  the  causality 
consists  of  the  common  property  of  producing  an  effect  defined  by  the 
characteristic  of  Doubt.  The  heterogeneity  which  is  said  to  appear  in 
the  form  of  referring  primarily  to  the  positive  alternative,  or  primarily 
to  the  negative  alternative,  etc.,  does  not  serve  the  purpose  of  a  diffe 
rentia,  as  it  is  not  sufficiently  extensive,  or  wide. 

Thus  Doubt  is  neither  three-fold  nor  five-fold,  but  is  of  one  kind 
only.  The  writer  of  the  aphorisms,  however,  will  himself  explain  its 
two-foldness  in  another  respect. 


'Universal  Substances  '  arc  Ether,  fcjpaue,  Time,  and  Soul. 


VAI&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


It  may  be  objected,  '  Doubt  is  knowledge  which  produces  the  desire 
to  know.'  —  This  is  not  the  definition,  as  it  overlaps  uncertainty.  Doubt 
is  knowledge  which  does  not  produce  impression  (samskara).'  —  This  too 
is  common  to  unmodified  or  undiliereritiated  knowled'ge  or  state  of  cons 
ciousness  ;  for,  if  it  is  a  concrete  knowledge,  then  Doubt  also  produces 
an  impression.  Again  though  it  is  a  'class/  yet  the  quality  of  Doubt  is 
not  a  characteristic,  for  as  the  quality  of  Doubt  does  not  reside  in  the 
object  containing  the  property  (the  perception  of  which  is  the  occasion 
of  the  Doubtj,  the  'class'  also  does  not  appear  there,  since  it  is  not  found 
that  a,  '  class  '  appears  elsewhere  than  in  what  it  classifies."  To  this  our 
reply  is  that  from  the  definition  of  Doubt  it  follows  that  Doubt  is  know 
ledge  of  diverse  and  contradictory  forms  in  respect  of  one  and  the  same 
object  —  17. 

Cause*  of  Doubt  or  Disbelief—  continued. 

Upashira.—  Doubt  is  two-fold  :  that  which  relates  to  external  objects,  and  that  which 
relates  to  internal  objects.  And  that  which  relates  to  external  objects,  is  also  tow  fold  : 
where  the  object  is  visible,  and  where  the  object  is  not  visible.  Of  these,  Doubt,  in  which 
the  object  is  visible,  may  be  illustrated  as  the  uncertainty  whether  it  be  a  post  or  a  person, 
which  arises  on  seeing  some  object  distinguished  by  height  ;  and  Doubt,  in  which  the  object 
is  not  visible,  is  such  as  when  on  seeing  the  horns  only  in  the  body  of  a  cow  or  a  gayal  (Bos 
gavseus),  etc.,  which  is  concealed  by  the  intervention  of  a  bush,  etc.,  the  uncertainty  arises, 
"whether  it  bo  a  cow  or  a  gayal."  In  fact,  in  the  latter  case  also  the  Doubt  really  relates 
to  the  property  of  the  horn,  i.  e.,  whether  the  horns  are  the  horns  of  a  cow  or  of  a  gayal.  The 
statement  of  the  two-foldness  of  Doubt  is  however,  a  figure  of  .speech.  Now,  the  (ieiius  (».  e., 
Common  property)  which  is  the  source  of  Doubt,  raises  Doubt  by  being  observed  either  in 
more  than  one  object  or  one  object.  He  explains  the  first  kind  :  f- 


fg  Dristam,  that  which  is  seen.  <g  Cha,  and  sg^  drista-vat,  Like 
that  which  was  seen. 

18.     And  that  which  is  seen,  resembles  that  which  was  seen  — 
(this  also  is  the  source  of  Doubt.)  —  97. 

Height,  which  is  seen,  is  the  source  of  Doubt.  '  Dristavat  '  is  formed 
by  '  yati/  i.  e.,  the  affix  of  similarity.  Thus,  something  similar  to  the 
previously  seen  post  and  person,  lies  before.  The  meaning  is  that  the 
height,  which  is  observed  in  what  lies  before,  is  a  source  of  Doubt,  be 
cause  it  has  been  previously  observed  (in  more  than  one  object).—  18. 

Causes  of  Doubt  or  Disbelief.  —  continued. 
Vpaskdra,  —  Ho  illustrates  the  observed  common  property  which  relates  to  one  object  :    ' 


Yathu-dristam,  that  which  has   been  seen    in  a    certain    form 
t  A-yatha-dristatvat,  because  it  is  not    seen    in    that   form,    g 
Cha,  and. 

19.     (Doubt    also   arises),   where  that  which  has  been  seen  in 
one  form,  is  seen  in  a  different  form.  —  98. 

"  The  source  of  Doubt"—  this  completes    the    aphorism.     The   word 
1  cha  '  understands    what  has  been    said    before.     The  meaning    is  that 


KAN  AD  A  StiTRAS  II,  1,  20.  85 

because  an  object  is  seen  in  a  different  form,  therefore  that  which  was 
seen  in  a  certain  form,  also  gives  rise  to  Doubt,  as  Chaitra  who  was  seen 
in  a  certain  form,  *'.  e.,  with  hair  on  his  head,  is  at  another  time  seen  not 
in  that  form,  i.  e.,  with  the  hair  removed.  Then  afterwards  when  the 
very  same  Chaitra  is  seen  with  his  head  covered  with  a  piece  of  cloth, 
Doubt  arises  whether  this  Chaitra  has  hair  or  not.  Here  the  identity 
of  Chaitra  is  the  common  property  which  gives  rise  to  Doubt,  and  it  is 
seen  in  one  object  only.  Therefore  what  is  here  the  source  of  Doubt  is 
seen  in  one,  undifferentiated  object.  —  19. 

Above  continued. 

Upaskdra.  —  He  says  that  the  very  common  property  of  being  (cognised   or)   the  object  of 
thought  is  the  cause  of  Doubt  : 

n 

Vidyu-a-vidyata,     from    science    and    uescienc.     «g  Cha, 
and.     ?j<m:   Sarksayali,  Doubt. 


20.     Doubt  (arises)  also  from  science  and  nescience.  —  99. 

Internal  Doubt  really  springs  from  science  and  nescience.  For 
instance,  an  astronomer  predicts  correctly,  and  predicts  incorrectly 
eclipses  of  the  moon,  etc.  Accordingly  Doubt  arises  in  his  mind  as  to 
his  knowledge,  whether  it  be  accurate  or  not.  Or  knowledge  is  some- 
-  times  science,  and  sometimes  nescience,  f.  e.,  wanting  in  proof  ;  and 
consequently,  Doubt  arises  with  respect  to  something,  whether,  ivas- 
tnuch  as  it  is  known,  it  be  existent  or  non-existent. 

The  retention  of  the  word,  'Doubt,'  in  the  aphorism,  indicates  that 
here,  too,  Doubt  arises  only  from  the  perception  of  the  common  property, 
and  not  from  any  other  source.  Thus  the  opinion  held  by  some  that 
he  uncertainty  or  inconstancy  of  cognition  and  non-cognition  alluded 
to  in  the  definition  of  Gautama,  "Doubt  is  deliberation  in  expectation 
of  a  differentia,  due  to  the  proof  of  the  common  properties  as  well  as 
of  the  properties  of  similar  and  dissimilar  objects,  the  non-proof  of, 
or  uncertainty  as  to,  these  properties,  and  also  the  uncertainty  or  in 
constancy  of  cognition  and  non-cognition,  "  (Nyaya-Sutras  I.  I.  22),  is 
a  different  source  of  Doubt,  is  hereby  refuted.  —  20. 

Vivfiti.  —  Here  the  affix  'tasi'  in  'vidya-avidyatas'  is  used  in  the 
genitive  sense.  Therefore  the  expression  means  "of  true  knowledge  and 
false  knowledge."  And  the  doubt  is  whether  it  be  true  knowledge  or 
false  knowledge.  From  the  word  'cha/  'and,'  it  follows  that  Doubt 
as  regards  the  object  of  knowledge  also  arises  from  the  perception  of 
the  common  property.  Thus,  'The  mountain  contains  fire/  'The  lake  con 
tains  fire/  in  these  and  other  causes  of  true  or  false  knowledge,  the 
Doubt,  whether  such  knowledge  be  true  or  false,  arises  from  the  know 
ledge  of  the  common  property  of  their  both  being  knowledge.  In  like 
manner,  after  such  Doubt,  Doubt  also  arises  whether  the  mountain  con 
tains  fire  or  not,  whether  the  lake  contains  fire  or.  not,  etc.,  from  the 
knowledge  of  the  common  property  of  their  being  objects  of  knowledge. 
Now,  .a  contrary  certainly,  the  proof  of  which  has  not  been  obtained,  is 
opposed  to  Doubt,  and  the  Doubt  whether  it  be  true  knowledge  or  false 


86  VA1SESIKA  PHILOSOPHY 


knowledge    operates    to    dispel   such  contrary  certainty.     And  not  that 
such  Doubt  of  itself  gives  rise  to  Doubt  about  the  object  of  knowledge. 

Sound  —  wliat  ? 

Upajkdra.  —  Having  thus  elucidated  the  nature  and  characteristic  of  Doubt  v.-hioh  is  the 
first  member  of  an  examination,  he  now  explains  the  object  Sound  which  is  the  subject  matter 
of  examination,  and  says  : 

*fts*f:  *T  J?JS3[:  II  R  I  R  I  R?  II 


:  Srotra-grahanah,  of  which  ear  is  the  organ  of  apprehension. 
Ij:   Yah,  which,  ?J«J:   Arthah,  object,  tf:   Sah,  that.  qs»:  Sabdah,  sound. 

21.     Sound  is  that  object  of   which  the    organ    of   apprehen 
sion  is  the  Ear.  —  100. 

'Srotragrahanah'  means  that  of  which  ear  is  the  organ  or  instru 
ment  of  apprehension.  'Arthah'  means  that  which  contains  properties. 
So  that  the  definition  has  not  the  defect  of  over-extending  to  Sound 
ness,  loudr.ess,  etc.,  Attribute-ness,  Existence,  and  other  properties 
residing  in  Sound  and  capable  of  being  perceived  by  the  ear.  By  the 
word  'arthah'  meaning  that  which  contains  properties,  the  possession  of 
a  class  property  is  intended  ;  hereby  it  is  indicated  that  Sound  called 
'/Sphota'  (i.  e.,  by  which  the  words  of  a  sentence  can  convey  a  complete 
sense),  inherent  in  Sound,  does  not  exist. 

It  may  be  argued  as  follows  ;  Sphota  must  be  postulated  on  the 
Strength  of  the  intuitions,  'ore  word/  'one  sentence.'  for  the  intuition, 
of  unity  does  not  arise  in  a  word  composed  of  several  letters,  nor  in  a 
sentence  composed  of  several  letters.  And  the  word  spliota  forms  a 
name  or  nominal  on  which  the  elucidation  of  the  sense  depends.  The 
letters  individually  do  not  at  all  produce  the  intuition  of  the  meaning 
of  the  whole  sentence;  their  combination  again  is  impossible,  because 
they  speedily  disappear,  being  uttered  by  one  speaker  ;  therefore  the 
intuition  of  the  sense  of  the  whole  arises  from  sphota  only,  because 
elucidation  of  the  sense  does  not  take  place  without  the  knowledge  of 
it.  And  this  sphota,,  although  it  is  present  in  one  and  all  the  letters 
standing  as  words,  yet  becomes  manifest  in  the  last  letter.  "  We  reply 
that  it  is  not  so.  Conventional  letters  form  words.  Thus  the  sense 
being  intuited  from  the  word  in  virtue  of  convention  alone,  what  is  the 
use  of  sphota?  The  use  of  the  expression  'one  word'  is  a  pretence,  inten 
ded  to  denote  the  one  property  of  making  up  one  sense,  possessed  by  a 
large  number  of  letters.  So  also  in  the  case  of  a  sentence.  If  some 
inner  meaning  of  the  word,  beyond  that  of  its  component  letters,  could 
be  apprehended  by  perception,  then  the  same  might  have  been  admitted 
to  be  sphota.  Therefore  the  author  of  the  aphorisms  has  overlooked  this 
doctrine  of  sphota  as  being  of  no  consideration  —  21. 

Causes  of  Doubt  with  respect  to  Sound. 

Upaskura.  —  Sound  having  thus  appeared  as  an  object  which,contains  properties,  its  being 
the  mark  or  Ether  depends  so-lely  on  its  being  an  Attribute.  Therefore  to  establish  its  Attri 
bute-ness,  he  brings  out  the  trilateral  Doubt,  and  says  : 

RR  I  «  II 


KANADA  SUTRAS  II.  2.  23.   '  87 


Tulya-jatiyesu,  in  homogeneous  tilings.  3p4!?fTJ  ^f  Arthan- 
t&rabhiites'ii,  in  heterogeneous  things  ff^R^  ViSosasya,  of  the  par 
ticular,  i.  e.,  the  difference,  or  differentia.  3^-11  Ubhayathu,  in  both. 
CEW^  Dristatv&t,  the  being  observed  ;  because  it  is  observed. 

22.  (Doubt   arises    in    respect   of    Sound),    because    its  dif 
ference    is   observed    both    in    (from)  homogeneous  objects  and  in 
(from)  heterogeneous  objects. — 101. 

"  Doubt  arises  in  respect  of  sound/' — is  the  complement  of  the 
aphorism.  Sound-ness  and  perceptibility  by  the  ear  are  observed  in 
Sound.  And  this  gives  rise  to  Doubt  whether  Sound  be  an  Attribute, 
or  a  Substance,  or  an  Action,  because  ihe  '  partcular/  i.  e.,  difference 
or  divergence  is  observed  both  in  homogeneoiis  objects,  namely  the 
twenty-three  Attributes,  and  in  heterogeneous  objects,  namely  Subs 
tances,  and  Actions.  But  Doubt,  whether  it  be  a  Genus,  or  a  Species, 
or  a  Combination,  does  not  arise,  inasmuch  as  difference  in  point  of 
being  existent,  being  produced  by  a  cause,  etc.,  is  observed. 

It  may  be  said,  "  A  non-common  property  cannot  be  the  cause  of 
Doubt  by  being  the  cause  of  indecision  or  uncertainty.  And  Sound 
ness  as  well  as  perceptibility  by  the  ear  is  really  a  non-commou  pro 
perty."  We  say  :  Truly  its  difference  or  divergence  is  common  to  homo 
geneous  and  hetrogeneous  things,  and  so  only  this  common  difference 
or  divergence  has  been  stated  to  be  the  cause  of  Doubt.  Difference  or 
divergence,  which  is  the  counter-opposite  of  Sound-ness,  is  tho  common 
property  ;  and  the  characteristic  of  being  the  counter-opposite  of  the 
difference  or  divergence  belonging  to  both,  in  other  words,  Sound-ness, 
is  the  non-common  property.  Therefore  it  has  been  said  :  "  From  the 
observation  of  the  difference  in  both.''  Here  the  observation  of  parti 
cular,  i.  e.j  the  difference,  in  both,  i.  e.,  in  homogeneous  and  heterogene 
ous  things,  constituting  tho  cause  of  Doubt,  it  becomes  really  the 
common  property. — 22. 

Sound  not  a  Substance. 

Vpaskdra. — -Showing   Doubt   in  this   way,  he  says,  in  order  to  eliminate  the  alternative 
of  Substanoe-ness  : 

H 

Eka-dravyatvat,  because  it  resides  in    one    Substance.    *T 
Na,  not.  3*tf  Dravyam,  Substance. 

23.  (Sound)  is  not  a  Substance,  since  it  resides   in  one  Subs 
tance  only. — 102. 

'Ekadravyam  J'is  that  which  has  one  Substance  ouly  as  its  combi 
native  cause.  And  no  Substance  whatever  contains  a  single  Substace 
as  its  combinative  cause.  Therefore,  owing  to  this  difference  in  property 
from  Substances,  this  Sound  is  not  a  Substance.  This  is  the  meaning. 
—23. 


88  VAlSESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


Nor  an  Action. 

Upaskdrct.—T.t  may  be  said,  !:  Action   is  surely    uni-.sub^tantial.     Therefore   Sound    may 
be  an  Action,"    So  he  says  : 

*  i  R  i  w  u 


f  Na,  not.  nf(  A  pi,  also  ^r«T  Karmma,  action,  sl^f^JTOiq;  Acluiksu- 
satvut,  not  being  visible*. 

24.     Nor    (is  Sound)  an  Action,  because  it  is  not  an  object  of 
visual  perception.  —  103. 

Because  the  intuition  of  perception  of  Sou,  id  is  not  visual,  i.  ^.,  is 
produced  by  an  external  so.iso-organ  other  than  the  eye.  So  that  the 
import  is  that,  like  the  quality  of  Taste,  etc.,  Sound-ness  also  does  not 
reside  in  Actions,  because  it  is  a  l  class  '  wbich  does  not  reside  in  the 
objects  of  visual  perception.  —  24. 

Round  iy  tranxittn!,  and  not  eternal. 

"Upasltdra.  —  If  it  is  said  that,   as    it   speedily   disappears,  liko   Turowing    upwards,  etc  , 
therefc.ro  Sound  is  an  Action  ;  so  ho  sayo  : 


Gunasya,  of  Attribute.  ^T^:  Satah,  being.  3JTW  i':  Aj)avargah, 
speedy  destruction,  frwffa;  Karmmabhih,  with  Actions.  tfN^q  Sadharm- 
myara,  resemblance. 

25.  The  resemblance  (of  Sound),  although  it  is  an  Attribute, 
with  Actions,  consists  in  its  speedy  destruction.  —  104. 

'  Apavargah  '  means  speedy  destruction.  And  this,  eveu  in  the  case 
of  Attribute-ness,  is  dependent  upon  the  incidence  of  a  rapidly  appearing 
destroyer,  in  the  same  way  as  duality,  etc.,  are.  This  constitutes  only 
its  resemblance  to  Actions,  and  not  its  Action-ness.  The  quality  of 
undergoing  rapid  destruction  which  you  (i.  e.,  the  objector)  advance  as 
as  an  argument,  is  not  one-pointed  i.  e.,  multifarious,  because  it  is  found 
in  Duality,  Knowledge,  Pleasure,  Pain,  etc.,  as  well.  This  is  the 
import.  —  25. 

Above  continued. 

Upaskdra.  —  It  may  bo  said,  "  Lst  Sound  be  proved  as  an  Attribute.  Still  it  cannot  be 
the  mark  of  the  existence  of  Ether.  For  it  would  justify  the  inference  of  Ether,  if  it  were 
an  effect  of  it.  But  it  is  eternal  instead  Its  occasional  non-cognition,  however,  is  duo  to 
the  absence  of  something  which  could  reveal  it."  With  this  apprehension,  he  says  : 

n  *  i  R 

fl-fl  :  Satah,  of  (Sound  as)  existent.  fir^PTWi;  Lingabhavat,  from  the 
absence  of  mark. 

26.     (Sound  does  not  exist  before  utterance),  because    there   is 
no  mark  of  (Sound  as)  evistent  (before   utterance),  —  105, 


KANADA   SftTRAS  II,  2,  29.  8fr 

For,  if  Sound  were  existent  (before  and  after  utterance),  then  there 
would  be  found  some  '  mark,'  i.  e.,  additional  proof,  of  it  as  existent. 
But  in  the  state  of  non-hearing,  there  is  no  proof  that  Sound  exists. 
Therefore  it  is  only  an  effect,  and  not  something  which  requires  to- 
be  revealed  only.  —  26- 

Above  continued. 

Upaskdra.  —  He   says   that   for   this   reason   also,  it  (Sound)   Is  not  something  which  only 
requires  to  be  made  known  : 


Nitya-vaiadharmmyat,  owing  to    difference  in    property 
from  what  is  eternal. 

27.  (Sound  is  not  something  which  only  requires  to  be 
brought  to  light),  because  it  differs  in  property  from  what  is 
eternal.  —  106. 

The  difference  of  Sound  from  what  is  eternal,  is  observed.  Where 
as,  as  in  "  Chaitra  speaks/'  the  existence  of  Chaitra,  Maitra,  etc.,  even 
though  they  are  covered  from  view,  may  be  inferred  from  their  voice  ;. 
and  whereas  that  which  reveals,  e.  g.,  the  lap,  etc.,  is  never  inferred 
by  that  which  is  revealed,  e.  y..  the  water-pot,  etc.  ;  therefore  Sound 
is  only  a  product,  and  not  something  which  requires  to  be  brought  to 
light.  This  is  the  sense.-  —  27- 

Above  continued. 

Upaskdra  —  Pointing  out,  the  objections   to  |itB   being  something  to   be   revealed   only   he 
now  states  the  ground  of  its  being  non-eternal  : 


:  II  R  I  R  I 

vf^3l:  Anityah,  non-eternal.  ^  Cha,  and.  ?nq  Ayaru,  it.  qswiTft:  Kara- 
natah,  from  its  having  a  cause. 

28.     And   Sound   is  non-eternal,  (because  it  is  observed  to  be 
produced)  by  a  cause.  —  107. 

"  Because  its  production  is  observed,"  —  this  is  the  complement. 
For  Sound  is  observed  as  issuing  out  of  the  (temporary)  conjunction 
of  the  drum  and  the  drum-stick,  etc.  So  that  it  is  non-eternal,  because 
it  has  a  production  (or  beginning).  Or  "  From  a  cause  "  may  imply 
the  reason  that  it  has  a  cause.  —  28. 

Above  continued. 

Upaskdra.  —  Lest  it  might  be  said  that  the  possession  of  a  cause  is  disproved  in  Sound  by 
its  very  nature,  BO  he  says  : 


IM  i  *  i  *&  u 


n  Na,  not.  ^  Cha,  and.  ?jfe^  Asiddham,  disproved.  fcnVTTOl  Yikarat 
from  change. 


VAI£ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


29.     Nor    is    (the    dependence    of    Sound    upon  a  cause)  dis 
proved  by  its  modifications.  —  108. 

From  observing  the  loudtiess,  softness,  and  other  modifications,  it 
should  not  be  concluded  that  the  possession  of  a  cause  by  Sound  is 
thereby  disproved.  For  a  loud  or  soft  sound  is  perceived  according 
to  the  hardness  or  softness  of  the  beating  of  the  drum  with'the  drum 
stick,  and  the  like  ;  whereas  the  loudness,  etc.,  (».  e.,  the  intensity) 
of  that  which  is  made  known,  is  not  dependent  on  the  loudness,  etc., 
(t.  e.,  the  intensity)  of  that  which  makes  it  known.  Hence  from  its 
undergoing  modification  according  to  the  modification  of  the 
cause,  it  is  inferred  to  be  a  product,  and  not  something  to  be  revealed 
only—  29. 

Above  -continued. 

Upaikdra.  —  It  may  bo  argued,  "  It  is  the  virtue  of  that  which  reveals,  that  it  reveals 
in  the  form  of  intensity,  softness,  eto.  And  it  is  Air  impelled  by  the  drum  and  the  drum 
stick,  etc.,  which,  being  intense  and  soft  or  slow  (in  velocity  and  volume),  produces  lik« 
perceptions,"  Hence  he  says  : 


n  *  i  *  v>  u 

Abhivyaktau,  in  (the  theory  of  the)  manifestation  or  revela 
tion  (of  Sound).  iVn^  Dosat,  from  defect.  Because  there  will  be  a  defect. 


30.     (Sound  is  not  eternal),  because  the  theory  that  it  requires 
to  be  revealed  only,  will  entail  a  defect.  —  109. 

On  the  theory  of  the  revelation  of  Sound,  the  defect  will  arise  that 
(in  each  case)  an  invariable  relation  of  the  revealer  and  the  revealed 
will  have  to  be  admitted  in  respect  of  things  co-existent  and  caj  able 
of  being  perceived  by  the  same  sense.  But  the  invariable  relation-ship 
of  the  revealer  and  the  revealed  is  nowhere  observed  of  such  things. 
If  it  be  not  assumed  here,  then  it  will  follow  that  on  the  manifestation 
of  one  letter,  say  ka,  all  the  letters  will  become  manifest.  The  rejoinder 
that  an  invariable  relation  of  the  revealer  and  the  revealed  is  in  fact 
observed  to  obtain  among  the  characteristic  of  being  existent,  the 
characteristic  of  being  a  man,  and  the  characteristic  of  being  a  Brah- 
mana,  which  are  also  co-extensive  and  are  revealed  by  their  individual 
difference,  situation,  and  origin,  is  invalid.  For  they  lack  in  beii  g 
co-extensive,  inasmuch  as  the  extension  of  the  characteristic  of  being 
a  man,  or  of  the  characteristic  of  being  a  Brahmana,  is  not  so  large  as 
that  of  the  characteristic  of  being  existent.  —  30. 

Above  continued  (Production  of  Sound.) 

Upasfcdra.  —  He  says   that   for   the  following   reason   also   Sound  is  not  something  which 
requires  to  be  revealed  only  : 


n  R  i  ^  i  \\  n 

amyogat,  from    Conjunction.    ft<rt?mf    Vibhagat,    from    Dis 
junction.     «j     Cha,    and.     <I5$1^     6abdat,    from    Sound.    ^     Cha,    and. 
frT:  Sabda-nigpattih,  production  of  St  und. 


KANlDA  SUTRAS  II,  2,  33.  91 

31.     Sound  is  produced  from  Conjunction,  from  Disjunction, 
and  from  Sound  also.  —  110. 

'  From  Conjunction'  —  i.  e.,  from  Conjunction  of  the  drum  and  the 
drum-stick.  '  From  Disjunctio.,'  —  i.  e.,  when  a  bamboo  is  being  split  up. 
Here  Conjunction  is  by  no  means  the  cause  of  the  fiist  Sound,  because 
there  is  then  no  Conjunction.  Therefore  the  Disjunction  of  the  two 
halves  of  the  bamboo  is  the  efficient  or  conditional  cause,  and  the  Dis 
junction  of  the  halves  and  Ether  is  the  non-combii,ative  cause.  And 
where  Sound  is  produced  in  a  distant  flute,  and  the  like,  there  Sound 
which  is  produced  in  the  order  of  a  current,  reaches  the  portion  of 
Lther  limited  by  the  hollow  of  the  ear,  and  thereby  becomes  heard. 
1  heref  ore  Sound  is  produced  from  Sound  also.  —  31. 

Abcve   continued. 
Upaskdra.  —  He  brings  forward  another  ground  of  its  being  non-eternal  : 

II 


ffl^:^  Lingat,  from  its  mark.  «BT  Cha,  and.  Slfac1*:  Ariitya^?  non- 
eternal.  fl5^:  oabdah,  Sound. 

32.     Sound  is  non-eternal,  also  because  of  its  mark.  —  111. 

The  meaning  is  that  Sound,  consisting  of  letters  ('i.  e.,  articulate 
Sound),  is  tion-eternal,  because,  while  possessing  a  '  class/  it  is  capaple 
or  beii.g  perceived  by  the  ear,  like  the  Sound  of  a  lute,  etc.  —  12. 

Arguments  for  the  eternality  of  Sound. 

Upaxkura.  —  No\v,  in  order  to  confute  the  arguments,    advanced    by   the  conclusioniat  (tha 
Minuimsa  thinker),  in  support  of  the  eternality  of  Sound,  he  says  : 

u  *  i  *  i  ^  u 


tt(:  Dvayoh,  of  both.  §  Tu,  but.    S,^t:  Provrittyoh,  of  the  activities 
-or  occupations.    ^>JjEU<l  Abhavat,  from  the  non-existence  or  absence. 

33.     (Sound   is    eternal),  because  (otherwise)  the  occupations 
of  both    (the    teacher    and    the     pupil)    will   vanish    out    of   exis 

tence.  —  112. 

The  word  '  tu  '  cuts  off  connection  with  the  context,  and  introduces 
the  statement  of  an  objection  of  the  first  party.  The  occupation  or  em 
ployment  '  of  both/  i.  *.,  of  the  teacher  and  the  pupil  i,»  teahing  and 
learning  respectively,  is  observed.  "  From  its  non-existence  or  absence," 
i  e.y  from  the  entailment  of  its  non-existence.  For  teaching  is  an  act  of 
gift  or  donation.  The  teacher  makes  a  gift  of  the  Veda  to  the  pupil.  If 
it  is  something  constant  or  fixed,  then  a  donation  of  it  is  possible.  The 
second  party  may  say,  "  A  cow,  and  the  like  which  are  being  given  away, 
are  perceived  as  standing  between  the  donor  and  the  donee  ;  whereas 
the  Veda,  etc.,  are  not  perceived  as  lying  between  the  teacher  and  the 
pupil.  Therefore  teaching  cannot  be  a  donation."  Our  (i.  e.,  the  first 
party's)  reply  is  that  they  are  perceived  in  the  interval  between  the 


92  VAlgE§IKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

teacher  and  the  pupil  by  the  ear  of  a  person  standing  there.  Moreover, 
the  eternality  of  Sound  follows  from  recurrence  also.  As  in  "  He  sees 
the  colour  for  five  times/'  the  recurrence  or  persistency  of  colour  which 
is  constant  or  permanent  is  observed,  so  the  recurrence  or  persistency 
of  Sound  in  "  The  anuvdka  or  paragraph  has  been  read  ten  times, 
twenty  times,"  is  proof  of  the  constancy  or  permanence  of  Sound.  And 
constancy  or  steadiness  being  proved,  since  nothing  is  known  which 
can  destroy  it,  its  eternality  also  is  necessarily  proved,  on  the  principle 
"  What  will  afterwards  destroy  it  which  is  constant  or  lasting  all  this 
time  ?"  This  is  the  import.  —  33. 

Arguments  for  the  eternality  of  Sound  —  continued. 
UpasJcdra.-~  He  translates  another  reason  urged  in  favour  of  the  eternality  of  Sound  : 


Prathamasabhfit,  from  the  word  '  the  first.' 

34.     From    the   word,    'trie-first,'    (it   follows    that    Sound    is 
eternal).  —  113. 

The  meaning  is  that  the  thrice  recitation  of  the  first  and  the  last 
'mantra  for  kindling  a  sacrificial  fire,  as  enjoined  in  the  text,  "  The  first 
should  be  recited  three  times,  the  last  three  times/'  is  not  justified  or 
accountable  without  the  steadiness  of  Sound.  —  34. 

Bhdsya  —  reads  H-Aii-  34  as  Prathamd-ddi-/Sabddt  while  the  meaning 
remains  unchanged.  (  Adi  =  and  others,  e-  </.,  the  second). 

Above  continued. 

Upa»kdra.—So  translates  another  reason  advanced  by  the  oonolusionist  for  the  eternality 
of  Sound  : 


II  ^l  R  I     *  II 


Sampratipatti-bhav&t,  from  the  possibility  or  existence 
of  recognition.  ^  Cha,  and. 

35.     (The    eternality    of    Sound    follows),  also  from    the  pos 
sibility  of  recognition.  —  114. 

'  Sampratipatti-bhavat  '  —  i.e.,  from  the  existence  of  recognition. 
The  word  'pratipatti  '  (cognition)  alone  would  have  conveyed  the  sense 
of  recognition  which  is  a  particular  kind  of  the  former  ;  therefore  the 
prefix  '  Sam'  (in  the  sense  of  thorough-ness)  implies  certainty.  Thus, 
•"  He  is  reciting  the  very  same  poem  which  was  recited  by  Maitra," 
"  He  is  reading  the  same  verse  over  and  over  again,"  "  You  are  repea 
tedly  saying  the  same  thing  which  has  been  said  before/'  "  You  are 
«veu  now  making  the  very  same  statement  which  was  made  by  you  last 
year  and  the  year  before,"  "  It  is  that  same  letter  ga,"  —  on  the  strength 
of  the  recognition  of  Sound  in  such  cases,  the  steadiness  or  permanence 
of  Sound  is  proved.  —  35. 


KANlDA  SftTRAS  II,  2,  37.  93 


The  same  refuted. 
Upaskdra.—~  Confuting  all  these  reasons,  he  says  : 


m 

(:  Saridigdhah,  Doubtful.      Uncertain.     Inconclusive,  flfa  Sati, 
•existing.   qg£f  Bahutve,  plurality. 

36.     Plurality    (of    Sound)    existing,    (these   arguments    are) 
inconclusive.  —  115. 

'Sandighah,'  i.  e.,  not  one-pointed.  So  it  has  been  said,  "  Kailyapa 
taught  that  a  contradictory,  unproved,  or  uncertain  mark  was  no  mark." 
Thus  it  is  oberved  that  there  can  be  learning,  repetition,  and  also  re 
cognition,  also  if  there  is  a  plurality  of  diversity  of  Sound,  therefore 
these  arguments  are  inconclusive.  For,  "He  learns  dancing,"  "He  prac 
tises  dancing."  "He  danced  the  same  dance  twice/'  "You  are  dancing  the 
«ame  dance  to-day,  which  you  danced  the  other  day,"  "This  man  also  is 
dancing  the  same  dance  which  was  danced  by  another  dancer,"  —  in 
these  cases,  learning,  repetition,  and  recognition  (of  Action)  are  obser 
ved.  But  you  (the  conclusionist)  too  do  not  on  this  account  admit  the 
permanence  (or  eternality)  of  dancing  which  is  a  particular  kind  of 
Acti  ng—  36. 

Bhdsya  :  —  reads  II.  ii.  36  as  simply  sandigdhdh,  supplying  for  him 
self  the  reason  for  the  declaration  there,  and  joins  the  latter  part  of  it 
to  II.  ii.  37,  a-id  interprets  it  to  mean  that  in  spite  of  plurality  of  indivi 
dual  sounds,  their  definite  enumeration  is  possible  by  means  of  reference 
to  their  genera  or  types. 

Counter  objection  stated  and  answered. 

Upaskdra.—lt  may  be  objected,  '  Fifty  letters  ;  an  eight-lettered  mantra  ;  a  three-lettered 
mantra  ;  the  eight-lettered  raetra,  anustubk  ;  ete.  —  'How  can  there  be  suoh  uses  of  members, 
when,  the  letters  being  non-eternal,  there  is  a  possibility  of  their  being  infinite  in  number 
according  to  the  difference  of  utterance  ?  "  So  he  says  : 


IM  i  *  i  ^  u 

Samkhyabhavah,  the  existence  or    application  of    Number. 
s  Samanyatafyjfrom  Genus. 

37.     The    existence   of   number   (in  Sound)  is  with  reference 
to  the  Genus.  —  116. 

The  meaning  is  thab  the  existence  of  the  number,  fifty,  etc.,  arises 
from  the  class  notion  of  fca,  ga,  etc.  Although  there  might  be  an  infini 
ty  of  ka'Sj  etc.,  the  letters  determined  by  the  notions  of  fca,  ga,  etc.,  are 
fifty,  three,  or  eight,  in  the  same  way  as  Substances,  Attributes,  etc.,' 
are  nine,  twenty-four,  etc.,  although  there  may  be  an  infinity  of  them 
according  to  differences  within  the  group  of  each  of  them.  This  is  the> 
import. 


94  VAI&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


The  objector  may  say:  "  This  is  that  ga," — This  recognition  itself 
proves  the  permanence  of  Sound.  Nor  is  it  opposed  by  the  perception, 
*  Loud  ga,  soft  ga,'  which  conveys,  contrary  properties  ;  because  loud- 
ness,  etc.,  are  there  due  to  external  conditions.  Nor  is  it  to  be  main 
tained  that  there  cannot  appear  any  difference  from  the  difference  of 
the  external  condition  also  ;  for,  then,  the  crystal  also  will  not  shine  as- 
different,  developing  in  the  form  of  blue,  yellow,  etc.,  from  the  con 
junction  of  the  China  rose  tdpinja,  etc.,  nor  will  the  face  also,  when 
reflected  as  elongated,  etc.,  in  the  sword-blade,  jewel,  and  looking-glass, 
appear  to  be  different.  If  it  be  asked,  To  what  does  this  property  of 
loudness,  etc.,  belong,  which  influences  ga  ?  We  reply  :  It  may  be  the- 
property  of  Air,  or  of  utterance,  or  of  resonance.  What  is  the  use  of 
fixing  upon  the  particular  one  amongst  them  ?  You  also  admit  that 
loudness,  etc.,  are  natural  distinctions,  as  the  relation  of  high  and  low 
amongst  them  cannot  be  established  or  explained  by  the  notions  of 
ka,  ga,  etc." 

We  reply  :  It  is  not  so.     Because  even  when  such   contrary  percep 
tion  exists,  viz.,  '  ga  is  produced,'  '  <ja  is  destroyed,'  <  ga   which  was  just 
heard,    does    not    exist,'  '  the  noise  has  stopped,  etc.,  if  this  recognation 
d'jes  not  then  cease,  then  it  must  be  supposed  to  relate  to  class-notions. 
Otherwise  such     recognition  coming  to    rest    upon    the    permanence   or 
steadi-ness    of     individual    Sounds,    the    above    contrary     perceptions. 
themselves    would    not    be    produced.     Nor    is  this  the  property  of  Air,,, 
because  the  properties  of  Air  are  not  the    objects    of    aural    perception. 
Nor  again  is  it  the  property  of  the  utterance  ;  for  if    utterance    is    only 
Air,  then  the  defect  has  been  already   pointed    out  ;  if    it    is    something 
else,    then    nobody,  can  say    what  it  is.     Nor  again  is  it  the  property  of 
resonance,  for  loudness,  etc.,  are  perceived  also  in    the    resonance    from, 
the  conch,  etc.,  even  though  ya  is  not   found    there.     The  naturalness  of 
loudness,  etc.,  however,  does  not  involve  an  intermixture  of   classes,  for 
its  diversity  is  obtained  from  its  being  pervaded  by  the    class-notion   of 
ga,    etc.,     Moreover,    there   is    a    very   distinct    mode  of  distinguishing 
forms  in  the    ga's,    etc.,  utterer  by  male  and    female   parrots    and   man, 
as    also    in    those   uttered    by    a    male  and  a  female,  as  well  as  in  those 
uttered  by  those  who  are  neither  males  nor  females  ;  by  which  a  parrot,, 
etc.,    concealed    from    vision    by  branches,  a  screen,  etc.,    are  inferred. 
But  their     being  produced  by  external  conditions  does    not    arise    from 
external    conditions    which    can    be  perceived,     as  in  "  a  young  woman 
looking  yellow  with  saffron."     Nor  is  their  being  produced  by    external 
conditions    proved    by    argument,    for    no    proof    of    such  a  conclusion 
exists.     So  far  in  brief. — 37. 

Here  ends  the  second  chapter  of  the  second  book  in  ^ankara's- 
commentary  on  the  Vaisesika  aphorisms. 

Vivrtti — Some  explain  the  production  of  Sound  on  the  principle- 
of  ripples  and  waves.  According  to  them,  the  first  Sound  is  produced 
from  the  impact  of  a  drum  and  a  drum-stick,  etc.,  within  the  limits  of 
that  particular  Space.  Then  outside  that  circle  and  within  the  confines. 
of  the  ten  quarters  the  second  Sound  is  produced  from  the  first,  and 
extends  it.  After  that, beyond  this  second  circle,  and  within  the  confines- 
of  the  ten  quarters,  the  third  Sound  is  produced  from  the  second.  And 


KANlDA  SfiTRAB  II,  1-10.  95 


in  the  same  way  the  production  of  the  fourth  and  other  Sounds  should 
be  understood.  Others,  however,  hold  that  the  production  of  Sound 
takes  place  on  the  principle  of  the  ball  of  the  kadamba  flower.  In  their 
view,  the  second  and  other  Sounds  are  neither  single  nor  confined  to 
the  ten  quarters  take;i  together,  but  are  produced  ten-fold  in  ten-quar 
ters.  (Thus  the  one  is  the  theory  of  the  successive  production  of  single 
Sounds,  while  the  other  is  the  theory  of  the  simultaneous  production  of 
multiple  Sounds).  "  This  is  the  difference. 


VIA&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


BOOK  THIRD—  CHAPTER  FIRST. 

Objects  <f  the  senses. 

Upaskdra.  —  Having  thus  in  the  second  book  completed  'he  examination  of  the  external 
Substances,  the  another  following  the  order  of  enumeration,  now  proceeds  to  construct  a  basis 
for  an  inauiry  respecting  the  Soul. 


:  II  \  I  \  I  ?ll 

:  Prasiddhah,  universally    known,    perceived,   ff^qisrf:  —  Indri- 
object  of  the  senses. 
1.     The  objects  of  the  senses  are  universally  known.  —  117. 

The  objects  of  the  Senses,  c.  <j.,  Smell,  Taste,  Colour,  Touch,  and 
Sound,  are  capable  of  being  apprehended  by  the  several  external  sens  3- 
organs.  Amongst  them,  the  universal  cognition  or  experience  of  S  mnd 
having  been  shown  by  the  aphorism,  "  Sound  is  that  object  of  which  the- 
organ  of  apprehension  is  the  ear  "  (II.  ii.  21).  it  is  in  like  manner 
demonstrated  that  Smell,  etc.,  ending  with  Touch  (i.e.,  Smell,  Taste, 
Colour,  Touch)  are  universally  known.  Thus  Smell  is  that  object  of 
which  the  organ  of  apprehension  is  the  olfactory  organ  ;  Taste  is  that 
object  of  which  the  organ  of  apprehension  is  the  organ  of  taste  ;  Colour 
is  that  object  of  which  the  organ  of  apprehension  is  the  eye  alone  ; 
Touch  is  that  object  of  which  the  organ  of  apprehension  is  the  organ  of 
touch  alone.  And  by  the  word,  '  object  '  there  is,  in  all  these  cases, 
denoted  a  real  entity  possessed  of  properties,  and  therefore  the  defini 
tions  cannot  be  too  wide  by  over-extending  to  Smell-ness,  etc.,  and  to 
the  non-existence  of  Smell,  etc.  Hence  Smell-ness  is  the  possession  of 
a  sub-class  of  Attribute-ness,  appearing  in  what  is  apprehended  by  the 
olfactory  organ.  So  also  with  regard  to  Taste,  etc.  Consequently,. 
supersensuous  Smell,  etc.,  are  not  left  out.  —  1. 

yivfiti  __  '  Prasiddhah,'    means    subject    of    ascertainment    by   per 
ception. 

Mark  of  supersensuous  object. 

UpasTcdra  —  He  explains  the  application  of  the   universal  (experience   o"    the  objects  of  the 
aenses  to  the  inquiry  respecting  the  Soul. 


indriyartha-prasiddhih,  the  universal  experience  of 
the  objects  of  the  senses.  ff^'JTsfc'T:  Indriyarthebhyah,  from  the  senses- 
and  their  object,  sjsifar^q  Arthantarasya,  of  a  different  object.  \$j: 
Hetuh,  mark. 

2.  The  universal  experience  of  the  objects  of  the  senses  is 
the  mark  of  (the  existence  of)  object  different  from  she  senses  and 
their  objects.—  118. 

'  Hetuh/  t.  e.t  Mark,  '  Arthantarasya,'  i,  e..  of  the  Soul.  '  Indriyar 
thebhyah,  i.  e.t  from  the  senses  as  well  as  their  objects.  The  meaning- 
is  that  it  is  the  mark  of  the  Soul  which  is  a  different  object  from  Colour^ 


K ANADA  SUTRAS  III,  1,  4.  97 


'etc-,  as  well  as  from  those  which  possess  them.  Though  it  is  implied  here 
that  only  knowledge  is  the  mark  of  the  existence  of  the  Soul,  yet  inas 
much  as  there  being  a  universal  experience  of  the  objects  of  the  senses, 
the  immediate  presentation  to  the  mind  of  Colour,  etc.,  is  more  com- 
•monly  known,  the  mark  of  there  being  a  Soul  is  described  as  constituted 
by  tliat  universal  experience.  Wow  this  universal  ex]  erience  must 
:  reside  somewhere,  either  as  an  effect  as  a  water-pot,  or  as  an  Attribute, 
'or  as  an  Action.  This  universal  experience,  again,  since  it  is  an  act  in 
'the  same  manner  as  cutting  is  an  act,  must  be  produced  by  an  instru- 
'ment.  That  which  is  the  instrument  of  the  universal  experience  is  the 
senses  ;  and  the  latter,  being  an  instrument,  must  be  employed  by  an 
agent,  as  an  axe  and  the  like,  are  employed.  Thus,  that  in  which  this 
•'universal  experience  resides,  'and  which  employs  the  olfactory  and  other 
organs  for  its  instruments,  is  the  Soul.  —  2. 

The  body  or  the  st-nses  are  not  the  seat  of  perception. 

U,pax\idrQ.  —  Lest  it  be  said,  "Let  the  body  or  the  senses  be  the  foundation  of  the  universal 
experience  or  perception,  because  their  presence  and  absence  are  more  manifest  as  determin 
ing  perception.  What  is  the  use  of  the  ^supposition  of  any  other  foundation?  Thus,  consci 
ous-ness  is  an  attribute  of  the  body,  being  its  effect,  dike  its  Colour,  etc.  The  same  should  be 
understood  in  tne  case  of  its  beirg  an  attribute  of  the  senses  ;  "  so  he  says  : 


M  I  ?  I  ^  II 

^T:  S:ih,  that,  i.  e.,  perception.  3H<T^3r:  Anapadesah,  the  semblance 
or  simulacrum  of  a  mark  ;  a  false  mark. 

3.     Perception    (as  a  mark  inferring  the  body  or  the  senses  as 
'  its  substratum)  (is)  a  false  mark.  —  119. 

(  Anapadeiah'  mea^s  the  appearance  or  semblance  of  an  '  apadesa/ 
i.  e.,  mark.  Thus  the  meaning  is  that  the  being  an  effect  of  the  body  or 
the  senses  is  the  mere  semblance  of  a  mark,  inasmuch  as  such  an  argu- 
jm,ent  applies  to  the  cognition  produced  by  a  lamp  is  therefore  not-one- 
.pointed,  i.  e.,  multifarious  —  3. 

BTidsyd  —  The  sense  or  the  object  cannot  be  a  mark  for  the  inference 
'of  ;the  geif. 

Above  continued. 

!.}..:.,  ii  • 

Upaxkdra.  —  It  may  bo  rejoined,  "  By  '  the  being  an  effect  of  the  body  or  the  senses  '  is 
meant  the  being  an  effect  of  them  only  in  so  far  as  they  are  determined  by  the  characteristic 
of  consciousness  ;  whereas  the  whole  of  consciousness  is  not  the  effect  of  the  lamp,  eto.  There 
fore  there  is  no  indeterminateness  of  fluctuation."  So  he  says  : 


II  ^  I  ?  I  S  II 

Karanajnanat,    because   the    causes  or  constituents  are 
devoid  of  cognition  or  consciousness. 

|,  4.  (The  body  or  the  senses  cannot  be  the  seat  of  perception), 
because  there  is  no  consciousness  in  the  causes  (i.e.,  the  component 
parts,  of  the  body).—  120. 


98  VAI&ESIKA.  PHILOSOPHY. 

It  is  mea,nt  (that  the  body  or  the  senses  cannot  be  the  seat  of  per 
ception),  because  of  the  absence  of  consciousness  in  the  hands,  feet,  etc., 
or  in  their  parts,  which  are  the  causes,  i.e.,  components  of  the  body.  For 
it  is  observed  that  the  particular  attributes  of  Earth,  etc.,  are  preceded 
by  like  attributes  in  their  causes.  In  like  manner,  if  there  existed 
consciousness  in  the  components  of  the  body,  it  might  possibly  exist 
also  in  the  body.  But  this  is  not  the  case.  It  cannot  be  urged  that 
consciousness  may  exist  also  in  the  components  of  the  body  ;  for  it 
would  entail  the  absence  of  uniformity  in  the  actions  of  the  body,  since 
uniformity  is  never  observed  amongst  a  plurality  of  sentient  beings.  It 
would  then  alsj  follow  that,  after  the  amputation  of  the  hand,  there  will 
be  no  more  recollection  of  that  which  was  experie  iced  within  the  limit 
of  the  hand,  according  to  the  maxim,  il  One  does  not  remember  that 
which  has  bean  experienced  by  another."  Moreover,  the  supposition 
would  entail  that,  after  the  destruction  of  the  body,  there  would  be  no 
experience  of  the  Cv>  isequences  of  the  acts  performed  by  the  body,  e.  (/., 
causing  hurt,  etc.,  for  certainly  Maitra  does  not  suffer  the  consequences 
of  the  sins  committed  by  Ohaitra.  And  hence  there  would  be  a  i  anni 
hilate)  i  of  acts  performel,  a  id  a  i  acce-ion  of  acts  not  performed. — 4. 

The  body  or  the  senses  are  not  the  seat  of  perception,  continue  l- 

Upaskdra. — It  may  be  added  in  objection  that  consciousness  exists  in  a  minute  degree  in 
the  components  of  the  body,  whereas  it  is  manifest  in  the  body,  and  that  therefore  it  cannot 
be  said  that  it  is  not  preceded  by  a  like  attribute  in  the  cause,  nor  does  there  arise  the  impos 
sibility  of  uniformity.  Anticipating  this,  he  says  : 

\\\  m  *  n 


Karyesu,  in  the  effects.    3TT*U^  Jfumat,   (because    there    would 
be  consciousness. 

5.     Because    (there  would  be)    consciousness  in  the  effects.  — 
121. 

If,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  consciousness  existed  in  the  primary  causes 
of  the  body,  namely  the  ultimate  atoms,  then  it  would  also  exist  in  the 
water-pot,  etc.,  which  are  the  effects  originated  by  them  also.  Moreover, 
consciousness  would  exist  in  products  such  as  water-pots,  etc.,  also 
because  the  particular  attributes  of  Earth  pervade  all  terrene  ex 
istence.  But  consciousness  is  not  observed  to  exist  in  these 
products.  —  5. 

The  body  or  the  senses  are  not  the  seat  of  perception,  continued. 

Upaskdra.—  In  anticipation  of  the  further   rejoinder  that   consciousness)  ra»y    in   reality 
exist,  in  an  imperceptible  degree,  in  the  water-pot,  etc.,  also,  he  saya  : 


Ajnanat,  because  it  is  not  known.  *%  Cha,  and. 

6.     And    because    it  is  not  known  (that  any  minute  degree  of 
consciousness  exists  in  the  water-pot,  etc).—  122. 


KANADA  SftTRAS  III,  1,  7.  99 


The  meaning  is  that  there  is  no  consciousness  in  the  water-jar,. 
etc.,  inasmuch  as  it  is  not  known  by  any  means  of  knowledge.  If  you 
admit  that  which  is  beyond  the  range  of  all  means  of  knowledge,  then 
you  will  have  to  admit  also  that  a  hare  has  horns,  and  so  on.  For,  by 
no  kind  of  evidence,  is  it  known  that  consciousness  exists  in  the 
water-jar,  etc  —  6. 


Titi.  —  It  is  more  proper  to  conceive  some  one  other  substance  as 
the  seat  of  consciousness  than  to  imagine  a  plurality  of  consciousness 
iu  various  portions  of  matter.  This  is  the  import. 

On  the  theory  that  consciousness  resides  in  the  body,  recollection 
of  what  is  experienced  in  infancy,  will  be  impossible  in  youth,  etc  t 
because  of  the  non-existence  of  that  which  had  the  experience,  since 
the  destruction  of  the  infant-body  must  be  observed  by  the  destruction 
of  its  material.  Similarly,  there  would  be  no  activity  at  sucking  the 
breasts  on  the  part  of  a  child  just  born,  because  of  the  impossibility 
at  that  stage  of  the  understanding  that  this  is  the  means  of  attaining- 
the  desirable  which  is  the  cause  of  activity.  According  to  the  advocate 
of  the  existence  of  a  separate  conscious  being,  the  activity  explained  by 
the  possibility  of  reminiscence  due  to  the  impression  produced  by  the- 
understanding  in  the  previous  birth  that  this  is  the  means  of  attaining 
the  desirable.  Recollection  of  other  experiences  in  the  previous  birth. 
does  not  take  place  owing  the  absence  of  appropriate  extern  nl 
stimuli. 

Bhdsya.  —  reads  III.  i.  5  and  6  as  one  aphorism,  and  explains  it  in 
the  sense  that  as  cognition  is  found  within  one  effect,  e.  g.,  the  body, 
and  is  not  found  within  another  effect,  e.  g.,  a  jar,  therefore,  it  follows 
that  there  can  be  no  cognition  in  their  combinative  causes  (which  must 
be  same  in  both  cases). 

Fallacious  mark. 

UpaskAra.  —  It  may  be  urged,  "  It  has  been  affirmed  that  an  employer  (a  presiding  soul) 
is  inferred  from  the  organ  of  hearing  tand  other  instruments.  But  this  is  not  a  legitimate 
inference,  for  the  auditory  and  other  organs  are  neither  identical  with,  nor  are  produced 
by,  the  Soul,  and,  unless  one  of  these  alternatives  be  admitted,  there|is.no  proof  of  the  universal 
concomitance  or  inseparable  existence  of  these  organs  and  the  Soul  ;  and,  unless  there  be  suck 
inseparable  existence,  thero  can  bo  no  inference."  So  he  says  in  reply  : 


\ 


I  ?  I  vs  n 


Anyat,  something  else.    ^  Eva,     certainly.  \?j:  Hetuh,  make. 
jfr!  Iti,  hence.    W^nflf:.  Anapadesah,  no  mark. 

7.  A  mark  is  certainly  something  else  (than  that  of  which 
it  is  a  mark).  Hence  (a  mark,  which  is  identical  with  the  thing 
of  which  it  is  a  mark,  is)  no  mark  (at  all.)  —  123. 

The  mark  or  means  of  proof  can  but  be  something  else  than  that 
which  is  t->  be  proved.  It  cannot  be  identical  with  that  which  is  to  be 
proved  ;  for,  were  it  so,  it  would  follow  that  the  thing  which  is  to  be 
proved,  would  have  no  differance  from  the  means  of  proof.  Therefore,  a. 
means  of  proof,  constituted  by  identity  with  that  which  is  to  be  proved, 
is  no  means  of  proof,  i.  e.,  no  mark  at  all.  —  7. 


100  VAI^ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


Bhdsya.  —  Something  quite  different  is  the  mark  of  inference  of  the 
Self;  the  sense  or  the  object  cannot  be  such  a  mark.  What  this 
*  something  quite  different  '  is,  is  declared  in  the  eighteenth  aphorism 
of  this  chapter. 

Fallacious  mark  —  continued. 

UpaskAra.  —  It  be  may  said,  "As  the  Soul  is  not  identical  with  the  auditory  and  other 
organs  of  sense,  so  there  is  no  production  of  the  latter  from  the  former.  For  the  senseorgans 
•of  hearing,  etc.,  are  not  produod  from  the  Soul,  as  smoke  is  produced  from  fire  "  So  he  says  : 


II  ^  I  ?  I  c;  || 

fcrc  Arthantaram,  any  one  thing  :  ft  Hi,  because-  9rafcTC9T  Arlh- 

antarasya,  of  any  other  thing.  ^TT^T:  Anapadesh,  not  a  mark. 

8.  (Although  a  mark  is  quite  different  from  that  of  which 
it  is  a  mark,  still  they  are  not  wholly  unconnected),  for,  any  oi.e 
thing  cannot  be  a  mark  of  any  other  thing.—  124. 

Because,  as  the  effect,  e.  g.,  smoke,  etc.,  is  a  different  thing  from 
an  ass,  so  it  is  also  a  different  thing  from  its  cause,  e.  g.,  fire,  etc.  So 
that  i'i  the  absence  of  any  distinction  in  respect  of  being  a  different 
object,  a  particular  nature  is  the  regulative  principle  here,  whereby 
the  smoke  does  not  infer  an  ass,  but  only  fire.  And  if  that  nature 
belongs  to  any  thing  other  than  the  effect,  then  that  too  really  becomes 
a  mark.  Thus  an  effect  cannot  be  a  mark,  if  it  is  devoid  of  the  parti 
cular  nature  intended  here.  Thus,  identity  and  causation  only  cons 
titute  inseparable  existence  or  universal  concomitance  ;  these  two  are 
reduced  into  inseparable  existence  ;  or,  it  is  co-ordinate  with  them  as 
the  principle  of  inference  ;  or,  its  apprehension  is  dependent  upon 
the  apprehension  of  the  above  two  only.  Hence  the  aphorism  is  only 
the  statement  of  an  argument  for  causing  confusion  to  the  disciples 
in  the  above  way.  This  is  the  import.  —  8. 

Marks   of   inference. 

Upaskdra.  —  Now,  in  order  to  make    it    clear  that    universal    concomitance   or  inseparable 
existence  may  be  found  elsewhere  than  in  the  cases  of  identity  and  causation,  he  saya  : 


n  \  i  ?  i  s.  i) 

Sariayogi,  the  conjunct.  ^Mlfa  Samavayi,  the  combined  or  in 
herent.  ijTr^^TT^rf^  Ekarthasamavayi,  the  combined  together  in  oi.e 
thing,  or  co-inherent.  R<tf^I  Virodhi,  the  contradictory. 


9.     The    conjunct,  the  combined,  the  con-combined,  and  the 
contradictory  also  (are  marks  of  inference).  —  125. 

"  The  body  has  skin,  because  it  is  the  body"  —  here  the  mark  is 
the  conjunct  or  the  contiguous.  For  skin  is  described  as  a  natural  in 
tegument  of  matter  capable  of  growth  and  decay.  And  it  is  neither  an 
effect  nor  a  cause  of  the  body,  but  merely  produced  together  with  the 
body  and  in  invariable  conjunction  with  it.  Similarly,  the  combined  is 
also  a  mark.  For  instance,  "  Ether  possesses  Magnitude  or  extension, 
"because  it  is  a  Substance,  like  a  water-pot,  etc."  ;  here  Magnitude  or 


KANADA  StfTRAS  III,  1,  12.  101 


extension  which  is  to  be  proved  is  proved  by  the  property  of  Substance- 
ness  which  is  in  essential  combination  with  Ether.  Or,  to  take  another 
•example.  Tho  extension  of  an  atom,  a  particular  form  or  limit  of  exten 
sion  or  Magnitude  is  proved  by  this  that  the  relativity  or  degree  of 
-extension  or  Magnitude  must  somewhere  cease  ;  whereby  the  ultimate 
atom  is  inferred  as  that  in  which  the  limit  of  extension  rests. 

The  inference  of  Ether  by  Sound,  etc.,  and  the  inference  of  the  Soul 
by  knowledge,  etc.,  are  inferences  of  the  cause  by  the  effect  ;  so  that 
they  are  not  i-istanced  here.  —  9. 

Marks  of  inference  —  continued. 
Upask'ira  —  Tae    author    of    the   aphorisms  illustrates   the   co-inherent      or     co-existent 


II  \  I  ?  (  ?°  II 

q  Karyyam,  an  effect.  ^TT^qfaTC^  Karyyantarasyi,  of  another  effect. 
10.     One    effect    (may    be    ^he    mark  of  inference)  of  another 
effect.—  126. 

An  effect  6.  g.,  Colour,  is  the  mark  of  another  effect,  e.  g.,  Touch. 
This  is  merely  illustrative.  Thus,  that  which  is  not  an  effect,  e.  g.,  the 
unity  of  Ether,  is  a  mark  of  the  individual  separateness  of  Ether,  and 
so  in  the  case  of  its  extreme  largeness.  —  10. 

Above  continued. 
Upaskdra.  —  He  illustrates  the  contradictory  mark. 

II  \  I  ?  I  \\  II 


Virodhi,  the  contradictory.  ^PJrf  Abhiitam,  the  non-existent, 
or  non-product,  or  that  which  has  not  taken  place.  ^cT^T  Bhutasya,  of 
the  existent,  or  that  which  has  taken  place. 

11.     The    opposite,    i.e.,    the    non-existent    (is  a  mark)  of  the 
existent.—  127. 

That  which  has  not  taken  place,  e.  g.,  a  shower,  [is  a  mark  of  that  which 
has  taken  place,  e.  g.,  the  conjunction  of  air  and  clouds,  (where  clouds 
l^eing  dispersed  by  air,  showers  do  not  take  place).  So  also  is  the 
recitation  of  a  mantra  which  is  the  contradictory  or  counter-agent  of 
a  tumour,  etc.  Thus  that  which  has  not  taken  place,  i.  e.,  has  not  been 
produced,  e.  g.,  a  tumour,  etc.,  is  the  mark  ef  that  which  has  taken 
place,  e.  g.,  the  recitation  of  a  mantra  or  sacred  text,  (where  a  tumour  is 
prevented  by  the  recitation  of  the  appropriate  mantra").  —  14. 

Marks  of  inference  —  continued. 
[7pa8kdra.—T3.e  gives  another  illustration  of  a  contradictory  mark  : 

II     \     I     ?     \     ?R    II 


v$3  Bhutam,  that  which  has  taken  place.   ^T*|?T^T  Abhutasya,  of  that 
which  has  not  taken  place. 


102  VAI&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

12.     That   which   has  taken  place,    (is  a  mark)  of  that  which 
has  not  taken  place.  —  128. 

That  which  has  taken  place,  e.  g  ,  a  tumour,  etc.,  is  a  mark  of  that 
which  has  not  taken  place,  e.  </.,  the,  recitation  of  a  mantra.  So  also  that 
which  has  taken  place,  e.  y.,  the  conjunction  of  air  aid  cloudsis  amark 
of  that  which  has  not  taken  place,  e.  g.,  a  shower.  Similarly  that  which 
has  taken  place,  e.  g.,  a  burn,  is  a  mark  of  that  which  has  not  taken 
place,  e.  y.,  the  application  of  a  gem,  etc.,  to  destroy  the  burning  pcwer 
of  the  fire.  Similar  instances  should  be  understood.  —  12. 

iLbove  continued. 
Upaskdra.—  He  illustrates  another  contradictory  mark  : 

n  *  m 


ijjr:  Bhufcah,  that  which  has  taken  place  *$3^T  Bhutasya,  of  that 
which  has  taken  place. 

13.  —  That    which    has    taken  place,  (is  a  mark)  of  that  which 
has  taken  place.—  129. 

There  is  sometimes  inference  of  an  existing  contradictory  from  an 
other  existing  contradictory  ;  as  when,  on  seeing  a  snake  swelling  with 
anger,  it  is  inferred  that  there  is  an  ichneumon  behind  a  bush.  In  this 
case,  the  snake  excited  is  that  which  is,  existet  t,  ai  d  the  ichneumon 
hidden  by  the  bush  is  also  in  existence.  Therefore,  an  existentr 
as  the  mark  of  another  existent  object.  On  the  other  hand,  a  shower 
cannot  exist  at  the  same  time  as  the  conjunction  of  air  and  clouds, 
nor  can  tumours,  etc.,  co-exist  with  the  recitation  of  mantras.  —  13. 

MarTfs  of  inference  —  continued. 
UpaskArc.  —  Now  he  shows  the  importance  or  use  of  the  above  recapitulation  : 


I  ^  I  f  I  tVHI 

Prasiddhipurvakatvat,  because  preceded    by  (the    re 

collection  of)  the  'pervasion'  or  universal  relation.    3n^R3J  Apade6asyar 
of  the  mark. 

14.  (These  are  valid  marks),  because  the  characteristic  of  an 
inferential  mark  is  that  it  is  preceded  by  (the  recollection  of  the) 
universal  relation  (of  itself  and  of  that  of  which  it  is  a  mark).  — 
130. 

'  Prasiddhi  '  means  recollection  of  universal  relation.  '  Apadesa  r 
denotes  a  mark.  Therefore  the  mark  attended  with  the  recollection  of 
universal  relation,  is  described  by  that  member  of  an  argument  which 
states  the  mark,  or  by  that  member  which  states  the  deduction  ;  so  that 
the  mark  is,  as  has  been  stated,  preceded  by  recollection  of  universal 
relation.  Thus  universal  relation,  (i.  e.}  a  true  major  premiss)  exists- 
in  all  these  cases  of  inference  of  an  agent  by  the  instruments  suchas- 

organ  of  hearing,  etc.,  and  of  the  Soul  as  their    substratum    by    th& 


KANADA  StTTRS  II,  1,  14.  103 

attributes  such  as  knowledge,  etc.;  whereas  there  is  no  universal  rela 
tion  in  the  inference  by  which  you  (i.  e.,  the  opponent)  have  sought  to 
establish  knowledge  as  a  i  attribute  of  the  body,  through  the  mark 
that  it  is  an  effect  o?  the  body.  This  is  the  import. 

It  may  be  asked,  what  is  this  universal  relation  ?  It  is  not  merely 
inviolable  relation  /for,  in  the  case  of  inference  from  cause  to  effect, 
it  is  not  known  that  inviolable  or  invariable  concomitance  is  the  being 
not  the  ground  of  the  co-existence  of  the  absolute  non-existence  of 
ihat  which  has  to  be  proved,  and  because  inference  from  cause  to  effect 
it  is  impossible  that  invariable  concomitance  is  the  not  being  the  seat 
-of  that  which  is  not  the  seat  of  that  which  has  to  be  proved,  and 
also  because  smoke,  etc.,  are  the  seat  of  that  which  is  not  the  seat  of 
that,  whatever  it  may  be,  which  has  to  be  proved. 

Nor  is  it  inseparable  existence,  for  that  is  either  the  non-existence 
-of  the  mark  i  i  the  absence  of  that  which  is  to  be  proved,  or  existence 
•of  the  mark  after  deduction  has  been  drawn  from  that  which  is  to  be 
prove  1.  It  cannot  be  said  that  because  sometimes  there  is  non-existence 
of  smoke,  also  where  no  ass  exists,  and  there  is  existence  of  smoke  also 
where  an  ass  exists,  therefore  uniform  agreement  and  uniform  difference 
-are  intended  here  ;  because  the  very  same  uniformity  is  the  subject  of 
•enquiry. 

Nor  is  it  relation  to  a  whole.  If  it  be  the  relation  of  the  whole  of 
the  major  term  to  the  middle  term,  such  relation  does  not  exist  even 
in  the  case  of  smoke,  etc.,  which  are  not  equally  pervasive  as  their 
corresponding  major  terms.  Let  it  be  relation  of  the  whole  of  the 
middle  term  to  the  major  term  ;  but  this  is  impossible,  for  there  does 
not  exist  in  the  whole  of  the  middle  term  relation  to  a  single  major 
•term-  Let  it  be  relation  of  the  whole  of  the  major  term  to  the  whole 
of  the  middle  term.  This  also  is  not  valid,  for  it  is  nowhere  possible 
-that  there  should  be  relation  of  the  whole  of  the  major  term  to  the 
whole  of  the  middle  term,  inasmuch  as  the  individuals  denoted  by  the 
major  and  ths  middle  term  are  related  each  to  each.  And  in  the 
case  of  the  terms  being  unequally  pervasive,  there  would  be  a  want 
•of  pervasion  or  universal  relation. 

Nor  is  the  relation  essential.  For  essence  means  either  the  nature 
•or  condition  of  a  thing,  or  (condition  in  itself,  or  production  by  itself). 
Now,  if  the  nominal  affix  which  converts  *  essence  '  into  the  form 
4  essential,'  has  the  sense  of  production  thereby,  then  the  definition 
will  be  too  narrow  to  apply  to  universal  relation  characterised  as 
-Combination.  If  the  affix  bears  the  sense  of  dependence  upon  it  or 
-residing  in  it,  in  that  case  also  the  definition  will  be  too  narrow  to 
-apply  to  Combination,  for  combination  does  not  reside  in,  i.  e.,  depend 
upon,  anything  whatever  ;  and  also  because  even  Conjunction  neither 
resides  in,  nor  is  produced  by,  smoke-ness,  etc.,  which  are  the  pro 
perties  of  the  middle  term. 

Nor  is  the  relation,  non-accidental  or  non-coditional.  For  an 
•up&dhi,  accident  or  external  co  idition,  itself  is  difficult  to  ascribe,  and 
were  it  easy  to  ascribe,  would  be  difficult  to  conceive.  And  were  it 
«asy  to  conceive,  it  would  still  involve  'mutual  dependence'  or 


104  YAI&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

*  reciprocity  '  or  argument  in  a  circle,  for  there  being  pervasion  of 
the  major  term,  the  conception  of  the  non-pervasion,  etc.,  of  the  middle 
term  would  depend  upon  the  conception  of  the  universal  relation. 

Nor  is  universal  relation  mere  relation.  Fcr,  though  variable 
relation  also  appears  as  universal  relation,  though  its  reference  to 
particular'  place  and  particular  time,  yet,  as  the  knowledge  of  it  does 
not  govern  the  inferential  process,  it  is,  therefore,  required  to  deter- 

-mine  that  universal  relation  only  which,  by  being  known,  will  become 
the  means  of  inference.  .  ,  ,  . 

Nor  is  universal  relation  co-existence  with  the  major  term  which 
is  not  the  counter-opposite  of  the  absolute  non-existence  'appertaining  to 
that  which  contains  the  middle  term,  (i.  e.,  the  rniuor  term;  For  fire- 
also  is  the  counter-opposite  of  the  absolute  non-existence,  presort -ih 
that  which  has  smoke,  since  it  is  not  that  in  a  kitchen  hearth  there  is. 

'not  the  absolute  non-existence  of  volcaiii'c  fire.  In  such  a,n  intance 
as  "This  has  conjuncetion,  because  ii  is  a  Substance,"  the  definition 

'would  become  too  narrow,  as  the  absolute  non-existence  of  Conjunction 
would  be  co-extensive  with  the  mark  or  means  of  inference.  It  cannot 

lbe  said,-  Universal  relation  is  co-extension  with  the  major  term  which 
is  not  the  counter-opposite  of  the  absolute  non-existence  which  is 
co-extensive  with  itself  and  which  is  the  contradictory  of  the  countpr- 
opposite,  because  the  absolute  non-existence  of  conjunction  falls  short 
of  being  the  contradictory  of  the  counteropposite."  For  the  absulute 
non-existence  of  conjunction  also  is  the  contradictory  of  the  counter- 

. opposite  ;  otherwise,     it  would    be    useless    to     imagine     differences    of 

/delimiting  circumstances  for  differences  ,  of  delimitations  are  not 
imagined  for  the  purpose  of  showing  the  states  ;of  -being  produced  and 

.non-eternal.        ; 

Nor  is  universal  relation  the  not  being  the  foundation  or  substratum 

•of  non-co-extension    with    the    major  term  ;  for    in    the    inference    from 

cause  to  effect,    there  is   not  konwn  any    such  non-co-extension  with  the 

•-major  term.     It  is  in  fact  another    form  of  being  th^    foundation  of  that 

•which  is  not  the  foundation  of  the  major  term. 

Nor  is  the  universal  relation  of  a  thing  the  possession  of  the  form 
which  determines  its  relation  to  something  else,  for  the  characteristic 
,of  fire  also  has  the  function  of,  determining  relation  to  or  the  co- 
extensioji  of  smoke.  It  cannot  be  sait  that  because  of  wider  extension 
this  is  not  the  case  ;  for  it  i,s  o^sevred  that,  that  which  determines  the- 
pervasion  (e.  g.,  fire)  has  a  wider  extension  (in  other  words,  fire  exists- 
where  there  is  no  smoke),  and  the  characteristic  of  Smoke  also  has  a- 
wider  extension  inasmuch  as  there  exists  smoke  pendant  on  the  surface 
of  the  sky  e.  g.,  in  clouds;.  If  therefore,  a  qualification  be  added  for 
the  purpose  of  excluding  such  instances,  then  it  must  be  allowed  that, 
that  which  determines  the  characteristic  of  being  the  middle  term. 
(yy&pycC)  the  same  is  intended  to  determine  the  characteristic  of  being 
co-extended,  and  hence  there  is  the  fallacy  of  self-dependence  (Atmdsra- 
yo).  The  view  also  that  two  things  are  universally  related,  when  the 
One  possesses  the  form  of  determining  the  co-existence  of  the  other  in  a. 
common  substratum,  is  fallacious  in  the  same  way. 

In  reply  to  the  above  objections,  we  may  proceed  to  state  as- 
follows:  pervasion  or  universal  relation  is  a  non-accidental  relation; 


KANADA  SftTRAS  III,  1,  14.  105 


while  by  the  being  non-accidental  is  meant  co-existence  in  the  same 
substratum  with  a  variably  present  sddhya  or  that  \\hich  has  to  be 
proved  (i.e.,  the  major  term  which  is  predicated  of  the  minor,  in  the  con 
clusion),  of  all  those  in  which  the  mark  or  middle  term  is  sometimes 
present  and  sometimes  absent,  or  co-existence  in  the  same  substratum 
with  a  yddhyd  co-existent  with  the  absolute  non-existence  of  the  counter- 
opposites  of  all  those  which  are  the  counter-opposites  of  the  absolute  noi  - 
existence  co-existing  in  the  same  substratum  with  the  mark.  The  mean 
ing  of  the  two  expressions  is  co- existence  in  the  same  substratum  with 
the  sddhya  which  is  not  pervaded  by  anything  that  does  not  pervade  tie 
sddhana  or  the  middle  term  ;  in  other  words,  it  is  the  characteristic  <  f 
being  pervaded  by  all  that  which  is  jervasive  of  the  sddhya.  It  may 
be  said  that  this  is  difficult  to  understand  from  the  relative  com 
pound  which  has  been  employed  here.  For  this  reason  there  is  i. eed  of 
observation  and  argument  also.  In  other  words,  pervasion,  vydjiti,  is 
co-existence  in  the  same  substratum  with  the  sddhya  which  is  i. ot  the 
counter-opposite  of  the  absolute  non-existence  co-existing  in  the  same 
substratum  with  the  sddhana.  By  absolute  non-existence  is  intended 
that  which  possesses  the  counter-opposite  determined  by  the  genera  of 
fire-ness,  etc.,  Therefore,  even  though  in  the  smoke  of  the  kitchen 
hearth  there  is  co-existence  in  the  same  substratum  with  the  absolute 
non-existence  of  mountain  fire,  yet  it  is  no  fault,  because  there  never 
Arises  the  intuition  that  there  is  not  fire  in  that  which  has  smoke. 
Substanceness,  however,  is  never  co-existent  in  the  same  substratum 
with  the  absolute  non-existence  of  the  charateristic  of  being  in  con 
junction,  for  we  never  have  the  intuition  that  substance  is  not  con 
junct,  because,  although  conjunctions  singly  do  not  appear  in  that 
which  is  the  subject  of  pervasion,  yet  the  generic  quality  of  being 
conjunct  appears  in  that  which  is  the  subject  of  pervasion,  and  is 
itself  pervasive. 

Objection. — But  the  being  non-accidental  implies  the  absence  of 
accident  or  adjunct,  upddhi  ;  and  upddhi  itself  is  difficult  to  obtain. 

Answer. — It  is  not  so.  Because  the  characteistic  of  upddhi  belongs 
to  that  which  does  not  pervade  the  sddhana,  i.  e.,  the  middle  term,  while 
it  does  pervade  the  sddhya,  i.  e.,  the  major  term.  So  it  has  been  said, 
"  upddhi  is  that  which  is  dependent  upon  another  upddhi,  (for  determin 
ing  non  accidentally),  in  the  case  of  the  sddhana,  and  which  is  not 
dependent  upon  another  upddhi,  (for  determining  non-accidentality), 
in  the  case  of  the  sddhya." 

Objection. — But  the  definition  does  not  include  an  upddhi  which  is 
only  non -pervasive  of  the  sddhya.  For  example,  A  iris  perceptible,  because 
it  is  the  substratum  of  touch  which  is  perceptible.  Here  the  possession 
of  developed  colour  is  such  an  upddhi.  So  also  is  the  characteristic  of 
being  produced  by  eating  herbs  (which  might  produce  blackness),  in, 
*'  He  is  black,  because  he  is  the  son  of  Mitr&  "  (a  low-born  woman).  For, 
the  possession  of  developed  colour  is  not  pervasive  of  perceptibility, 
since  it  does  not  exist  in  the  perception  of  the  Soul  as  well  as  of  Attri 
bute  and  Action  ;  nor  is  the  characteristic  of  being  produced  by  eating- 
herbs  pervasive  of  blackness,  since  it  does  not  exist  in  the  case  of  the 
blacki.ess  of  the  black  crow,  cuckoo,  cloud,  black-berries,  etc. 


106  VAI&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


Answer — The  objection  is  not  valid.  For,  that  which  is  non-perva 
sive  of  the  sddhana,  while  it  is  pervasive  of  the  sddhya  as  finally  deter* 
mined, — the  same  is  intended  as  the  upddhi.  And  a  sddhya  becomes 
finally  determined,  when  it  is  determined  by  a  property,  by  determina 
tion  by  which  the  pervasiveness  of  the  upddhi  remains  unbroken.  In  the 
instances  given  the  possession  of  developed  colour  is  pervasion  of  per 
ceptibility  by  the  determination  or  limitation  of  external  substantiality, 
and  is  apprehended  by  agreement  and  difference.  As  regards  the  second 
instance,  it  has  been  ascertained  in  the  works  of  Charaka,  SuSruta,  and 
other  medical  writers,  that  the  characteristic  of  being  produced  by 
eating  herbs  is  pervasive  towards  the  sddhya  determined  by  the  black 
ness  of  a  person,  which  can  be  produced  (artificially).  Other  cases 
should  be  similarly  understood. 

Objection. — Still  it  is  not  the  meaning  of  the  word,  updplii.  An 
upddhi  is  something  the  property  of  which  shines  in  another  object,  t-g-, 
a  China  rose,  etc.,  in  reference  to  a  crystal,  etc.  In  the  case  of  an  un 
equally  pervaded  upddhi,  there  being  absence  of  the  characteristic  of 
that  which  can  be  pervaded,  its  property  cannot  shine  in  the  approved 
sddhana. 

Answer. — This  is  true.  The  primary  use  of  the  word,  upddhi,  is 
only  where  it  is  equally  pervaded  (as  the  sddhya),  e.  g-,in  the  possession 
of  fire  produced  from  moist  faggots,  (for  wherever  there  is  such  firer 
there  is  smoke,  and  vice  versa).  In  other  places,  its  use  is  secondary. 
The  secondary  sense  infers  variation,  or  deviation,  according  to  the 
rule  that,  that  which  deviates  from  the  pervader  of  something,  also 
deviates  from  that  thing.  And  there  exists  sddhana  which  deviates  fyom 
the  upddhi  which  is  pervasive  of  the  sddhya.  Hence,  that  the  sddhana 
deviates  from  the  sddhya,  and  that,  that  which  is  not  pervaded  by  that 
which  pervades  an  object,  is  also  not  pervaded  by  that  object,  together 
infer  that  there  is  no  proof  of  the  characteristic  of  being  pervaded,  or 
brings  forward  a  contrary  argument,  satpratipaksa*  there  being  proof 
of  the  non-existence  of  the  sddhya  from  the  non-existence  of  the  upddhi, 
which  is  pervasive  of  the  sddhya,  in  the  paksa,  i.  e.,  the  subject,  which 
is  the  minor  term).  So  it  has  been  said,  u  The  disputant  may  bring 
forward  an  upddhi,  governing  the  sddhya  finally  determined,  even 
though  it  be  divorced  from  the  rule  or  determination  of  the  sddhya 
maintained  by  the  speaker,  such  upddhi  being  equally  (a  means  of 
discrediting  the  conclusion,  or)  a  source  of  xatpratipaksa."  And  such 
upddhi  is  brought  forward  by  arguments  adverse  to  the  absence  of 
arguments  in  favour  of  bddha  obstruction,  (i.  e.,  the  certainty  of  the 
non-existence  of  the  sddhya),  and  deviation  (i.  e-,  the  non-co-existence 
of  the  sddhana  with  the  sddhya). 

It  has  boen  held  that  by  the  non-co-existence  of  which  the  non-cc- 
existence  of  the  sddhana  with  the  sddhya  arises,  the  same  is  upddhi.  But 
here  the  instrumental  case-ending  is  used  to  express  neither  instrument, 
nor  means,  mode,  nor  mark.  Nor  is  the  construction  to  be  completed 
thus,  By  the  non-co-existence  of  which  beingknown,  the  non-co-existence 
of  the  sddhana  with  the  sddhya  becomes  known  ;  for  the  definition,  not 

*  satpratipaksA  has  boen  defined  as  "  an  argument  which  contains  a  counter-mark  capable 
of  demonstrating 'the  non-existence  ef  that  which  has  te  be   proved,"  (vide  Tarka-samgrahaj. 


KANADA  StTTRAS  III,  2,  16.  107 

applying  to  an  unknown  upddhi,  would  not  apply  to  upddhis  in  obvious 
cases  of  non-co-existence.  It  is  diffcult  to  ascertain  it  (i.  e.,  upddhiy 
significatively  or  by  its  significance,  since  it  is  impossible  to  formulate 
or  invent,  an  upddhi  without  (first)  establishing  the  characteristic  of 
being  the  means  of  the  inference  of  non-co-existence.  The  characteris 
tic  of  being  other  than  the  paksa  (or  the  subject  of  the  conclusion), 
again,  though  suffering  from  the  characteristic  of  an  upddhi,  is  yet  not 
an  upddhi  ;  for,  it  would  involve  obstruction  to  itself,  e.  g.,  dubiousness 
and  not-one-pointedness  in  the  paksa.  For  if  there  is  no  doubt  about 
it,  then  it  is  not  a  paksa  ;  if  it  is  a  paksa,  then  doubt  is  necessary,  and 
consequently,  dubiousness  and  not-one-pointed-ness  become  certain. 
That  which  remains  to  be  said  on  this  topic,  may  be  sought  in  the 
Mayukha.  —  14. 

Enumer  ration  of  fallacies. 

Upaskdsa.  —  Now.  with  a  view  to  distinguish  (logical)  marks  (of  inference)  which  have 
gone  before  as  well  as  those  which  will  come  hereafter,  from  fallacious  marks,  he  begins  the 
section  of  fallacies,  ardisays  : 


:  II  ^  I  ?  I 

Aprasiddhah,  unproved,  ^jsfq^l  :  Anapedesah,  a  fallacious 
mark.  ?^r^  Asan,  non-existent.  tff?5*>*:  Sandigdhah^,  dubious.  *3  Cha,  and. 
i=*Hcffol:  Anapadesa^i,  A  fallacious  mark. 

15.     The   unproved  is  a  false  mark  ;  the  non-existent  and  the 
dubious  also  are  false  marks.  —  131. 

1  Aprasiddhah,  means  that  which  is  not  pervaded  or  in  universal 
relation,  and  that  the  universal  relation  of  which  has  not  been  observed, 
and  that  which  is  in  opposite  universal  relation,  i.  e.,  the  contradictory. 
The  word  includes  the  two  forms  of  the  unproved,  in  point  of  universal 
relation  or  being  pervaded,  arid  the  contradictory.  '  Asan  'means  non 
existent  in  the  paksa  or  the  minor  term,  i.  e.,  that  which  has  not  the 
property  or  possibility  of  residing  in  the  paksa  or  subject.  And  this  is 
due  sometimes  to  the  unreality  of  the  form  (attributed  to  the  mark),  and 
sometimes  to  the  absence  of  uncertainty  and  the  desire  to  prove  'as)  in 
the  proof  of  that  which  has  been  already  proved.  '  Sandigdhah'  means 
that  which  causes  the  doubt  whether  the  sddhya  be  existent  or  iion-exist- 
ent  (in  the  subject  of  the  conclusion).  And  this  arises  sometimes  from 
the  observation  of  common  property,  sometimes  from  the  observation  of 
a  non-common  property,  and  sometimes  from  the  observation  of  the 
mark  accompanying  the  sddhya  as  well  as  its  non-existence.  The  first 
is  general  multifarious,  the  second  is  particular  multifarious,  and  the 
third  is  inconclusive.  —  15. 

Bhdsyi.  —  splits  up  III.  i.  15  into  two  aphorisms:  "  Aprasidhah 
anapadtsak  "  and  Asanasandigdhah  cha  anapadesah." 

Fallacy  illustrated. 

Upaskdra.  —  Of  the  above-mentioned  false  marks,  he  gives  an  illustration  or  a  mark  which. 
is  fallacious  because  it  is  not  pervaded  by  the  denotation  of  the  major  term,  also  because  it  is 
contradictory,  and  also  because  it  is  not  known  to  exist  in  the  form  attributed  to  it  : 


:  M  1  1  1  1*  u 


108  VAlSESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


—  Yasmat,  because.    ftmqft   Visani,  (It)  has  horns.  ?npn^.  Tasmat, 
therefore.  9J>^:  Afivah,  a  horse. 

16.     Because  (it)  has  horns,  therefore  (it  is)  a  horse.  —  132. 

Where,  the  hody  of  an  ass  becoming  the  paksa  or  subject  of  the 
conclusion,  such  confusion,  as  u  This  is  what  is  a  horse,  because  it  has 
horns,"  due  to  the  observation  of  the  negative  co-existence  (or,  simply, 
disagreement)  that  that  which  is  not  a  horse  is  not  horned  as  a  hare, 
a  jackal,  a  man,  a  monkey,  etc.,  prevails,  there  it  is  an  example  of  the 
not-pervaded,  the  unreal,  and  the  contradictory  marks  (i.  e.,  the 
fallacies  of  noa-pervasion,  unreality,  and  contradiction).  —  16. 

Above  continued. 
Upaskdra.  —  Ha  illustrates  multifariouenesa  : 


Yasmat,  because,  fa^mft  VisjXni,    (it)    has    horns.  <T^Tct  Tasmat, 
therefore.  »ft:  Gauh,  a  cow.  fft  Iti,    such,    this.    "^    Cha,    and. 

Anaikantikasya,    of     a    not-one-pointed  or  many-sided    mark. 
Udaharanam,  an  example. 

17.     And,   "Because    (it)  has    horns,  therefore  (it  is)  a  cow,'* 
such  is  the  example  of  a  many-sided  (mark).  —  133. 

Where,  taking  a  buffalo  as  the  paksa  or  subject,  it  is  concluded  that 
it  is  a  cow  because  it  has  horns,  there  is  general  many-sided-ness.  But 
when  it  is  concluded  that  Ether  is  eternal  because  it  is  the  seat  of 
Sound,  then  there  is  particular  many-sided-ness.  So  also  in  such  ex 
amples  as  "  Sound  is  non-eternal  because  it  is  sound,"  there  being  no 
universal  relation,  there  is  only  particular  many-sided-ness.  But  when 
the  sddhya  or  the  middle  term  is  proved  (to  exist)  only  in  the  paska  or 
the  minor  term,  by  bringing  forward  arguments  which  exclude  vipaksa* 
or  contrary  instances,  it  is  then,  that  is,  when  co-existence  with  sapaksa^ 
(or  objects  of  the  same  class  as  the  paksa),  becomes  known,  that  the 
mark  of  inference  is  a  valid  mark,  for  a  paksa  j  also  must  be  a  sapakxa. 

There,  (i.  e.,  in  the  fifteenth  Sdtram  above),  the  unproved  is  that 
which  is  not  proved  by  pervaded  appearance  in  the  paksa.  And  it  is 
three-fold  :  (a)  unproved  in  point  of  being  pervaded,  (6)  unproved  as 
such  or  by  itself,  (*'.  e.,  in  respect  of  the  form  attributed  to  it),  and  (c) 
unproved  by  substratum  or  situation.  Of  these,  the  unproved  in  point 
of  being  pervaded,  is  that  of  which  the  pervasion  or  invariable  co-exist 
ence  has  not  been  observed,  whether  from  the  non-observation  of 
actually  existing  pervasion,  or  from  the  non-existence  of  pervasion. 
Hence  the  non-existence  of  favourable  arguments,  etc.,  are  different 
kinds  of  the  unproved.  And  this  invalid  mark  has  a  thousand  divisions 
according  to  the  diversity  of  impossibility  of  predicate,  impossibility  of 

*    Vipaksa  is  that  wherein  the  non-existence  of  that  which  has  to  be  proved,  is  certain. 
t  Sapaksa  is  that  wherein  the  existence  of  that  which  has  to  be  proved,  is  certain. 
t  Paksa  or   subject,   is    that   wherein   the   existence   of   that  which  has  to  be   proved,  i» 
doubtful. 


KANlDA  StfTRAS  III,  1,  16-  109 


subject,  impossibility  of  both,  uncertainty  and  impossibility  of  predicate, 
uncertainty  and  impossibility  of  subject,  uncertainty  and  impossibility 
of  both,  and  so  on.  And  in  all  these  cases,  only  absence  of  proof  can  be 
-discerned. 

Here  the  idea  is  this  :  The  mark  of  inference  is  of  three  kinds  only, 
according  to  its  division  into  the  purely  positive,  the  positive-and- 
negative,  and  the  purely  negative.  Amongst  these,  the  purely  positive 
is  an  attribute  belonging  to  all  subjects  of  attributes,  (i-  e.,  objects)  ; 
.e.g.,  knowableness,  nameableness,  qualifiability,  predicability,  absolute 
non-existence  of  annihilation  in  attributes  etc.,  destructible  by  the 
destruction  of  the  subtratum  of  the  absolute  non-existence  of  eternal 
substances,  etc.  For,  no  such  thing  exists,  as  that  in  which  these 
attributes  do  not  exist.  The  characteristic  of  the  purely  positive,  there 
fore,  is  that  it  penetrates  everywhere,  or  that  it  is  the  counter-opposite 
of  absolute  non-existence.  Though  these  exist  in  themselves  also, 
(and  so  that  uniformity  of  the  mutual  distinction  of  the  container  and 
the  contained,  is  violated),  that  is  no  fault ;  for  it  has  been  said,  li  In 
the  case  of  appearance  or  existence  (of  one  thing  in  another),  recourse 
should  be  had  to  proof,  and  not  to  that  which  establishes  difference  and 
non-difference." 

That  mark  is  purely  positive,  of  which  the  sddhyaia  purely  positive. 
Of  this  there  are  four  forms,  namely,  existence  of  the  paksa}    existence 
of  the  sapaksa,  unobstructedness,  and  the  not  being    confronted    with  a 
.satpratipaksa  or  equally  valid  argument  to  the    contrary,  which  are  the 
means  of  leading  to  inference.     The  same,  together  with    the  non-exist 
ence  of    the   vipaksa,   are    the    five    forme    of  the  positive-and-negative. 
With  the  exception    of  the   existence    of  the  sapaksa  the  remaining  are 
the  four  forms  of  the  purely  negative.     That  mark,    therefore,  is  a  mere 
semblance,  i.  e.,  a  false  mark,  which  is  void  of  one  or   another  of  all  the 
forms  which,  as  a  true  mark,  it  might  possess  as   the  means    of    leading 
-to  ait  inference.      Accordingly,  the  characteristic  of  being  a  false  mark 
or  fallacy,  is  the  being  void  of  One  or  another  of   the    forms    which    are 
the  means  of  leading  to  an  inference.    Hence  doubt  also,  like  certainty, 
about  the  voidness  of  one  or  another  of  these  forms,    is    an    obstruction 
to  inference,  and  proof  of  the  inconclusiveness  of  the  mark  put  forward 
by  the  speaker.     But  the  purely  positive  and  purely  negative  mark?  do 
not  become  fallacies  by  being  void  of  one  or    another    of    their    forms  ; 
because,  in  the  case  of  the  purely  positive,  non-existence  of  the  vipaksa, 
and  in  the  case  of  the  purely  negative,  existence    of  the    sapaksa,    lack 
the  characteristic  of  being  the  means  of  leading  to  an  inference.    Simi 
larly,  the  unproved  by  situation  (e.  g.,  a  castle  in  the  air),  the  unproved 
by  itself  (e.  g.,  a  golden  lion),  and  the  unproved  in    part,    are    fallacies 
by  reason  of  the  absence  of  that  form  which  is    existence  of    the  paksa  ; 
the  unproved  in  point  of  being  pervaded,    the    contradictory,    and    the 
;general    many-sided,    are    fallacies     by    reason  of    defect    in  that  form 
which  is  non-existence  of  vipaksa;    the    particular  many-sided    and    the 
inconclusive  are  fallacies  by    reason  of  defect  as    regards  existence    of 
the  sapaksa  ;  the  obstructed  and  the    confronted   with    an  equally  valid 
argument    to    the    contrary,    are    fallacies  by  reason  of  the  absence  of 
the  characteristics  of  not  being  obstructed  and  of  not  being  confronted 
with  an  equally  valid  argument  to  the  contrary.     So    also,    accidental- 


110  VAI&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


ness  and  inapplicability  do  not  lead  to  inference,  because  of  the 
absence  of  certainty  of  tlje  non-existence  of  the  vipaksa  •  absence  of 
favourable  argument,  and  unfavourable  argument,  also  do  not  lead  to 
inference  because  of  the  absence  of  certainty  of  the  non-existence  of 
the  vipaksa.  In  like  manner,  apparent  (but  fallacious)  examples^ 
inadequate  in  regard  to  the  sddhya,  or  in  regard  to  the  yAdhana, 
or  in  regard  to  both,  if  invalid  as  being  fallacies,  are  so  through  the 
uncertainty  of  the  existence  of  the  sapaksa.  If  they  are  fallacious  by 
themselves  as  being  examples  in  appearance  only,  yet  they  are  so 
mediately  through  the  mark  which  is  the  same  uncertainty  of  existence- 
of  the  sapaksa. 

Marks  of  which  the  positiveness  or  agreement  is  not  manifest,  and 
marks  of  which  the  negativeness  or  difference  is  not  manifest,  however,, 
are  resolved  only  into  the  insufficient,  the  inopportune,  and  the  ground 
of  defeat. 

Self-dependence,  mutual  dependence,  circle  in  an  argument,  and 
infinite  regression,  by  unsettling  the  certainty  of  universal  relation  or 
pervasion,  become  deficient  in  respect  of  one  or  the  other  of  the  forms 
of  existence  of  the  sapaksa  and  non-existence  of  the  vipaksa,  and  there 
by  acquire  the  nature  of  fallacies. 

Amongst  these  fallacies,  that  is  accompanied  with  non-co-existence,. 
which  causes  doubt  alternating  between  the  existeace  and  the  non- 
existence  of  the  sddhya.  The  contradictory  is  that  fallacy  which  pro 
duces  certainty  of  the  non-existence  of  the  sddhya.  The  unproved  is 
that  which  is  void  of  pervasion,  existence  in  the  paksa  and  proving. 
According  to  Kasyapa,  obstruction  and  an  equally  valid  argument  to 
the  contrary  are  not  independent  fallacies.  Of  these,  obstruction 
resolves  itself  either  as  the  unproved  by  situation,  or  as  the  many- 
sided  ;  as  it  has  been  said,  "  In  obstruction  (bddhd~),  the  mark  is  either 
non-existent  in  the  paksa,  or  is  many-sided."  An  equally  valid  argu 
ment  to  the  contrary,  also  by  causing  doubt  in  respect  of  pervasion  or 
invariable  co-existence,  etc.,  in  other  places,  really  resolves  itself  into 
the  many-sided,  etc. 

The  writer  of  the  vritti,  however,  says  that  the  word,  '  cha/  in  the- 
Sutram,  ^MRi^tSTq^fts^T^ ^V^^FH^T:  (III,  i,  15,  ibid'),  has  the  sense  of 
bringing  forward  bddhd  (obstruction}  and satpratipaksa  (an  equally  valid 
argument  to  the  contrary),  and  thereby  follows  the  view  of  Gautama 
as  expressed  in  thosdtram,  "  Fallacies  are  five,  that  which  is  accompanied 
with  non-co*existence,  the  contradictory,  that  which  is  identical  with 
the  paksa  that  which  is  identical  with  the  sddhya  and  that  which  is 
post  in  time,"(Nyaya  Sutram,  1.  ii.4).  But,  from  such  statements  as 
"  The  contradictory,  the  unproved,  and  the  dubious,  declared  Kasyapa, 
are  no  marks,"  it  appears  that  the  Sutrakara,  i.  e.}  Kanada),  himself 
was  inclined  to  uphold  the  threefoldness  of  fallacy.  The  word  '  cha/ 
however,  has  the  object  of  bringing  forward  what  has  been  stated 
before. 

This  ;s  the  idea.  I  have  not  dilated  upon  it  for  fear  of  increasing; 
the  bulk  of  the  book.  More  details  should  be  sought  in  Maytikha. — 17. 

Mark  of  Inference  of  Soul. 
.—'H.Q  now  points  out  the  result  of  the  analysis  of  fallacies  : 


KANADA  SUTRAS  III,  1,18.  Ill 


i  ^  i  ?  I  ?c;  ii 

Atma-indriya-artha-sannikarsat,  from  contact 
of  the  soul,  the  sense,  and  the  object.  ^  Yat,  which.  f^|T^  Nispadyate, 
is  produced.  ?TJ  Tat,  that.  ?T«I^  Anyat,  other,  different. 


18.  That  (i.  e.,  knowledge)  which  is  produced  from  the 
contact  of  the  soul,  the  sense,  and  the  object,  is  other  (than  a  false 
mark).  —  134. 

From  the  contact  of  the  soul,  the  sense,  and  the  object,  it  is  know 
ledge  that  is  produced.  And  it  is  a  mark  of  the  existence  of  the  soul, 
and,  as  such  a  mark,  is  different  from  the  unproved,  the  contradictory, 
and  the  many-sided,  that  is  to  say,  is  not  a  fallacy.  Thus,  knowledge 
is,  in  two  ways,  a  mark  of  the  existence  of  the  soul  ;  either  by  the 
inference  that  knowledge  must  reside  somewhere,  because  it  is  an  effect, 
like  colour,  etc.,  or  by  assuming  the  form  of  recognition,  e.  </.,  "  I  who 
saw  am  the  same  as  I  who  am  touching."  In.  the  former  case,  effectness 
belonging  to  knowledge  is  not  unproved,  because  of  the  assertion 
•"  (that)  which  is  produced  ;"  nor  it  is  contradictory,  for  here,  as  in  all 
other  instances  of  analoguous  inference  or  inference  from  a  sdmdnya- 
todrista,  or  commonly  -observed  mark,  there  can  be  no  contradiction  ; 
nor  is  it  many-sidod,  for  the  very  same  reason.  So  that  by  means  of 
the  commonly  observed  characteristic,  appertaining  to  it,  viz.,  of  being 
an  effect  or  an  attribute,  knowledge  truly  becomes  a  mark  of  the 
existence  of  the  soul.  Recognition,  again,  resiling  from  other  agents, 
resolves  into  having  but  one  agent  or  cause. 

(The  Bauddha  theory  criticised.) 

Objection.  —  Recognition  may  be  also  due  entirely  to  the  relation  of 
effect  and  cause  subsisting  between  understanding  and  consciousness. 

Answer.  —  This  cannot  be,  as  it  would  entail  recognition  also,  of  the 
understandings  of  the  disciple  and  the  preceptor. 

Objection.  —  But  relation  of  the  matter  (i.e.,  knowledge  which  causes 
activity  or  inclination)  and  the  form  does  not  exist  there;  and  that 
relation  is  the  exciting  cause  of  recognition. 

Answer.  —  'Matter,'  having  the  property  of  Substance,  cannot 
possibly  exist  in  the  understanding  (which  is  an  attribute).  Even  if 
its  existence  were  possible,  understandings  being  momentary,  recogni 
tion  of  what  was  perceived  before,  would  not  be  possible.  For,  no 
impression  is  thrust  into  subsequent  understandings  by  a  previous 
understanding,  since  you  do  not  admit  the  existence  of  an  abiding 
impression.  And  if  it  consists  of  the  form  of  a  stream  of  temporary 
understandings,  it  cannot  be  the  cause  of  recollection  at  another  time, 
nor  of  recognition. 

Objection.  —  The  stream  of  subjective  consciousness,  which  is  really 
•different  from  the  stream  of  objective  consciousness,  is  that  which  ra 
collects  as  well  as  that  which  recognises. 


112  VAlSESxJiA  PHILOSOPHY. 

Answer — If  it  is  permanent,  then  our  obeject  is  fulfilled.     If  it  is  of 
the  form  of  a  stream  of  temporary    understandings,  then    it  has  not  yet 
freed  itself    from  the    fault  already   pointed    out  ;  for  then    even    there- 
can  be  no  permanent    impression.     Moreover,    proof  is   wanting   that  it 
is  something  different  from  objective  consciousness. 

Objection — Proof  is  supplied  by  the  stream  of  understandings,  '  I 
am,'  '  am/  and  so  on. 

Answer. — May  be.  But  if  here  states  of  objective  consciousness- 
take  in  or  receive  as  their  matter,  only  the  subjective  consciousness, 
then,  in  the  absence  of  the  characteristic  of  being  the  matter,  from  the- 
states  of  objective  consciousness,  their  efficient  causality  also  will, 
disappear  ;  for  efficient  causality  is  derived  from  the  characteristic  of 
being  pervaded  by  the  characteristic  of  the  material  cause. 

Objection. — Let  there  be  no  efficient  causality  also. 

Answer. — In  that  case,  their  existence  also  is  gone.  For  the  cha 
racteristic  of  an  entity  or  real  substance  is  that  it  is  the  means  of 
serving  necessary  purposes. 

Objection. — Both  the  streams  are  received,  as  material,  jointly  by 
the  stream  of  objective  consciousness  and  the  stream  of  subjective- 
consciousness. 

Answer. — If  it  is  so,  then  what  fault  has  been  committed  by  con~ 
junction  of  wholes  made  up  of  parts,  etc.,  when  you  also  admit  that 
a  cause  can  operate  at  a  different  place  ? 

Therefore,  recognition  proves,  as  being  permanent,  the  soul  which 
is  inferred  by  knowledge,  as  its  substratum.  Hence  nothing  remains- 
unproved. 

Or,  the  stitram,  <i||cHP4^m*<jfil«hMf^  qfasq^  W5«R;  is  calculated  to- 
refute  the  Saiiakhya  theory  that  the  understanding,  being  eternal,  is- 
not  fit  to  infer  the  soul  as  its  cause.  It  should  be,  then,  interpreted 
thus  :  what  you  call  the  principle  or  entity,  viz.,  the  understanding,  is- 
nothing  but  knowledge  ;  for,  there  is  the  statement  of  synonyms, 
namely,  "  understanding,  comprehension,  knowledge."  And  it  is- 
produced  from  the  contact  of  the  soul,  etc.,  and  is  really  other  than 
the  inner  sense  the  existence  of  which  you  admit.  This  is  the  meaning. 
The  import,  therefore,  is  that  that  does  become  the  mark  of  the  ex 
istence  of  the  soul — 18. 

Vivriti — He  gives  another  proof  of  the  existence  of  the  Soul  : 

From  'contact,  i.e.,  of  the  mind  with  the  'object  of  the  sense,'  which: 
is  the  'soul,'  in  other  words,  from  the  conjunction  of  the  soul  and  the- 
mind,  the  'knowledge  which  is  produced/  in  the  form  of  "1  am  happy/' 
etc.,  is  'different/  i.e.,  other  than  inference,  as  a  proof  of  the  existence- 
of  the  Soul.  This  is  a  roundabout  way  of  indicating  that  knowledge- 
produced  by  the  cognition  of  the  soul  and  the  mind,  is  perceptual,, 
since  the  definition  of  perception  is  knowledge  produced  from  the* 
contact  of  the  senses  ond  objects.  Altough  such  perception  does  not- 
prove  the  soul  as  different  from  the  body,  etc.,  yet,  as  it  proves  the» 
aoul  in  general,  it  is  unobstructed.  This  is  the  import. 


KANADA  StTTRAS  III.  1.  19.  113 

Or,   the  s&tram  states  that  the  mark  which  infers  the  soul,  is  not  a 
false  mark. 

Marks  of  Inference    of  other  Souls. 

Upaskdra.—  Having    described   the   inference   of   one's   own    soul,    he   now    shows     the 
inference  of  other  souls  : 


I  3.  I  \\ 

Pravritti-nivritti,  activity  and  inactivity,  occupation  and 
withdrawal.  ^  Cha  and.  HWrifufr  Pratyag-atmani,  in  the  in-going  or 
in-dwelling  soul,  in  one's  own  soul,  IE  Driste,  observed.  *W*  Paratra, 
elsewhere,  of  other  souls,  f^ff^  Lingam,  mark. 


19.     And   activity  and  inactivity,  observed  in  one's  own  soul, 
are  the  marks  of  (the  existence  of)  other  souls.  —  135. 

'Pratyag-atmani'  means  in  one's  own  soul.  '  Pravritti-nivritti'  are 
particular  volitions  caused  by  desire  and  aversion.  By  them  are 
produced  bodily  actions,  characterised  as  ^&\  or  muscular  motion,  of 
which  the  objects  are  the  acqisition  of  the  agreeable  and  the  avoidance 
of  the  disagreable.  So  that,  on  observing  muscular  motion  in  another 
body,  the  inference  of  another  soul  takes  place  in  the  following  man 
ner.  This  muscular  motion  must  have  been  produced  by  volition, 
because  it  is  muscular  motion,  as  is  my  muscular  motion.  And  that 
volition,  is  the  product  of  a  soul,  or  is  seated  in  a  soul,  because  it  is 
volition,  as  is  my  volition  —  19. 

Here  ends  the  first  chapter  of  the  third  be  ok  in  the  Commentary 
of  Sankara  upon  the  Vaifiesika  Aphorisms, 


114  VAI&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY 

BOOK  THIRD—  CHAPTER  SECOND. 

Mark  of   the  existence  of  Mind. 

Upaskdra.  —  Distinction  of  real  and  fallacious  marks  is  the  subject-matter  of  the  (prece- 
dirg)  chapter.  Now,  going  to  bring  the  examination  of  the  Soul  to  a  close,  the  author,  by 
a  transgression  of  the  order  of  enumeration  (of  the  Substances)  (vide  I.  i,  5;,  introduces  th» 
examination  of  the  Mind,  and  says  : 


Atmendriyarthasanriikarse,  on  contact  of  the  Soul 
with  the  senses  and  their  objects.  STT'fi?!  Jnanasya,  of  knowledge.  m&: 
Bhavah,  existence,  production,  appearance.  ?nrfW  Abhavah,  non- 
existence,  non-production,  non-appearance.  (Bhdsya.  —  reads  the  words 
'  bhdvah  '  and  '  abhdvah  '  in  a  compounded  form  as  bh&vdbhdvah.'')  ^  Cha, 
and.  *H*T:  Manasah,  of  the  Mind.  f^JT  Lingam,  Mark. 


1.  The  appearance  and  non-appearance  of  knowledge,  on 
contact  of  the  Soul  with  the  senses  and  the  objects  are  the  marks 
(of  the  existence)  of  the  Mind.  —  136. 

He  will  say  that  the  movement  of  the  Mind  is  the  mark  (of  tha 
Soul).  If,  therefare,  Mind  is  found  on  examination  to  be  the  instrument 
or  means  of  knowledge,  and  as  being  dense,  moulded,  or  ponderable 
(  ifa*  )>  then  it  becomes  proved  that  the  Soul  is  that,  being  directed 
by  which,  the  Mind  comes  te  be  connected  with  the  sense  apprehensive 
of  the  desired  or  agreeable  object,  rather  than  with  any  other 
sense.  This  is  the  reason  of  the  violation  of  the  order  of  enumeration. 
The  meaning  is  that  the  Mind  is  that  which,  while  there  is  contact  of  the 
soul  with  the  sense  and  its  object,  being  connected  with  the  sense,  there 
is  production  ef  knowledge,  and  which  not  being  so  connected  with  the 
sense,  there  is  non-production  of  knowledge. 

Objection.  —  Mind  is  all-pervading  or  universal.  Nevertheless,  non- 
simultaneity  of  knowledge  can  be  inferred  from  this  alone  that  Mind 
possesses  the  property  of  an  iastrument.  Moreover,  Mind  is  universal 
because,  like  Time,  it  is  a  substance  void  of  any  distinctive  attribute; 
because,  like  the  Soul,  it  is  the  substratum  of  Conjunction  which  is  the 
non-combinative  cause  of  knowledge  ;  and  because,  like  Ether,  it  pos 
sesses  the  absolute  non-existence  of  Touch  ;  and  there  are  similar  other 
proofs  of  its  universality. 

Answer.  —  It  is  not  so.  If  Mind  were  universal  or  all-pervading, 
then  as  it  would  be  connected  with  all  the  senses,  there  would  be  only 
one  cognition  including  all  the  senses  (i.  e.}  omui-sensuous).  If  it  be 
replied  that  (objection}  such  is  not  the  case,  because  there  is  a  contrariety 
amongst  the  effects  ;  we  deny  this,  (answer}  for  a  complete  cause  does 
not  take  notice  of  contrariety  and  non-contrariety  whereby  it  might  be 
apprehensive  of  the  contrariety  of  the  characteristics  of  belonging  to 
perception  by  the  eye,  organ  of  taste,  etc.  It  cannot  be  said,  (objection) 
"Or,  it  (cognition)  may  be  of  a  variegated  form  like  variegated  colour, 
as  it  is  in  the  case  of  eating  some  pudding,"  (where  perceptions  of 
taste,  flavour,  etc.,  take  place  all  together)  ;  for  (answer}  even  there 


KANiDA  SftTRAS  III,  2,  2.  415 

attention  or  attachment  to  a  particular  object  (i.  e.,  taste  or  flavour, 
etc.,)  is  observed.  Nor  can  it  be  asked,  (objection)  "•  How  then  does  the 
complex  belief  arise,  viz.,  i  I  perceive  Colour,  Taste,  Smell,  and  Touch 
simultaneously  '"i"  ;  for,  (answer")  it  is  merely  a  sense  of  simultaneity 
in  respect  of  the  five  cognitions,  produced  by  the  swiftly  moving  Mind 
and  presented  in  memory.  It  cannot  be  objected  that  attention  to 
particular  objects  is  also  dependent  upon  the  property  of  the  instru 
ment,  for  the  answer  has  already  been  given.  If  it  be  maintained 
(objection')  that  attention  depends  upon  the  desire  to  understand  ;  we 
deny  this,  for,  (answer*)  on  that  supposition,  it  would  follow  that  when 
there  was  a  desire  to  understand  all,  there  would  be  a  total  presenta 
tion  of  all  objects,  wliereas  the  only  result  of  a  desire  to  understand  is 
connection  of  Mind  with  the  sense  percipient  of  the  oject  desired. 
Inasmuch,  therefore,  as  non-simultaneity  of  cognition  is  otherwise 
impossible,  the  Mind  is  proved  to  possess  a  minimum  of  divisibility. 
Consequently,  the  marks  of  universality  are  obstructed  by  proof  which 
comprehends  or  infers  the  subject.  Moreover,  if  the  Mind  were  all-per 
vading,  then  there  would  not  be  such  local  character  of  pleasure,  etc., 
as  in  "  pleasure  in  my  foot,"  "  pain  in  my  head,"  etc.  ;  for,  the  effects  of 
'universal  substances'  uniformly  appear  in  places  delimited  by  their 
non-combinative  causes.  It  cannot  be  said  that  in  our  view  also  it 
follows  that  pleasure,  etc.,  are  confined  to  the  place  of  the  atom  ;  for, 
the  rule  is  that  a  non-combinative  cause  really  produces  an  extensive 
effect  at  its  own  place,  so  that  there  is  no  opposition  to  their  produc 
tion  even  beyond  the  limits  of  their  instrumental  causes,  e.  g.,  sandal- 
wood,  etc.  It  cannot  be  urged,  "  Mine  too  is  request  for  remoteness 
from  ths  instrument  causes  ;  "  for,  it  would  entail  a  breach  of  the  above 
uniformity.  Further,  how  will  there  be  conjunction  of  the  universal 
Mind  with  the  Soul  ?  It  cannot  be  replied  that  it  is  without  beginning, 
for  then  disjunction  will  also  necessarily  become  beginningless.  It  canot 
be  said  that  owing  to  the  difference  of  their  limitations  (i.e.,  substrata 
wherein  they  take  place),  both  of  them  remain  uncontradioted  ;  for,  the 
difference  of  the  limitations  of  conjunction  and  disjunction  depends 
upon  their  own  causes,  whereas  in  the  case  of  the  difference  of  things 
which  have  no  beginning,  such  dependence  does  not  exist.  This  is  the 
direction.  —  1. 

Mind  is  a  substance,  and  te  eternal. 

Upnskdra.  —  Now,  it  may  be  asked,  ''The  perception  of  pleasure,  etc.,  is  producible  by 
an  instrument,  because  it  is  an  act,  like  the  perception  of  Colour  :  from  inference  in 
this  way,  or  by  the  non-production  of  simultaneous  cognition,  Mind  is  proved  as  the  instru 
ment  of  that  perception.  But  whence  does  it  derive  its  Substance-ness,  and  eternality?" 
Hence  he  says: 


II  \  I  R  I  R  I! 

Tasya,  its,  of  the  mind.  5*^=1  fa?T&  Dravyatva-nity  atve,  substance- 
ness  and  eternality.  ^nTH  Vayuna,  by  Air.  «-m<?^lci  Vyakhyate,  ex 
plained. 

2.  The  Substance-ness  and  eternality  of  Mind  are  explained 
by  (the  explanation  of  the  Snbstance-ness  and  eternality  of) 
Air.—  137. 


116  VAI!§E§IKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


As  the  ultimate  atom  of  Air,  inferred  from  Substance  made  up  of 
parts,  is  a  Substance,  because  it  possesses  attribute  and  action;  BO 
Mind,  inferred  by  the  non-production  of  simultaneous  cognition,  IK  & 
Substance,  because  it  possesses  attribute.  For  it  is  not  productive  of 
cognition,  withont  conjunction  with  the  sense,  whereby  it  might  appear 
that  possession  of  attribute  does  not  belong  to  it.  Moreover  the  pre 
sentation  of  pleasure,  etc.,  (to  the  Soulj  must  have  a  sense  as  its 
instrument,  because  it  is  a  presentation,  like  the  presentation  of  Colour, 
etc.  Hence  Mind  is  proved  as  an  instrument  or  sense.  And  the  being 
a  sense  means  the  being  the  foundation  or  seat  of  the  conjunction  of 
the  Mind  which  is  the  instrument  of  cognition  ;  so  that  the  Subtance- 
ness  of  Mind  is  proved  without  much  ado.  And  its  eternality  follows 
from  its  not  being  made  up  of  any  other  Substance.  Arid  this  latter 
characteristic  follows  from  the  absence  of  any  proof  for  the  supposition 
of  its  being  made  up  of  parts  —  2. 

Mind  is  one. 

Upaskdra.—-  Then  the  doubt  arises  whether  there  be    one   Mind,    or  more   than  ons  Mind, 
existing  in  eaoh  individual  body.     He  states  the  means  of  decision  : 


II    ^    I    R   I    ^   II 

.  atnayaugapadyat,     from     the    non-simultaneity    of 

volitions.    STPTqtTTfn^    Jfianayaugapadyat,    from   the  non-simultaneity  of 
cognitionjs    ^  Cha,  and.     ^r*j    Ekam,  one. 


3>.  From  the  non-simultaneity  of  volitions,  and  from  the  non- 
simultaneity  of  cognitions,  (it  follows  that  there  is  only)  one 
^Mind)  (in  each  organism).  —  138. 

"  Mind  in  each  organism  "  is  the  complement  of  the  Sutram. 

If  there  were  many  Minds  in  a  single  organism,  then  cognitions  and 
volitions  would  be  simultaneous.  It  is  not  a  valid  conclusion  that 
many  volitions  are  produced  at  one  and  the  same  time,  because  simulta 
neous  actions  are  observed  in  the  fingers  of  the  hands  and  the  toes  of 
the  feet  of  a  dancing  girl  ;  for,  that  being  explained  or  possible  by  the 
swift  movement  alone  of  the  Mind,  simultaneity  of  necessary  or  corres 
ponding  particular  attributes  of  the  Soul  in  their  indestructible  state, 
is  not  obtained.  Hereby  (t.  e.,  by  the  necessary  particular  attributes  of 
the  Soul  in  their  indestructible  state),  the  theory  that  in  one  and  the 
same  body  there  are  five  Minds,  and  that  on  the  conjunction  of  two, 
three,  four  or  five  of  them  with  their  respective  senses,  two,  three,  four 
or  five  cognitions  are  simultaneously  produced,  is  refuted,  as  it  would 
entail  a  superfluity  of  suppositon  ;  while  the  sense  of  simultaneity  is 
upheld  (  as  an  illusion).  The  implication  of  the  simultaneity  of  two 
cognitions,  e.  g.,  the  cognitions  "  bitter  treacle,"  produced  by  the 
connection  of  the  Mind  with  the  sense-organ  of  Touch,  und«r  the  limita 
tion  of  the  sense-organ  of  Taste,  also  does  not  exist  in  view  of  the  pro 
perty  (t.  e.,  of  rapid  transition)  of  the  instrument  or  internal  sense,  (i.  c.t 
Mind).  Action  also  in  the  two  parts  of  a  lizard,  snake,  etc.,  cut  into  two 
or  three  pieces,  arises  from  the  impact  of  the  chopper,  etc.,  or  the  rapid 
transition  of  the  Mind,  or  the  invisible  operation  of  another  (and  barren) 
Mind  which  has  just  slipped  off  from  a  liberated  Soul. 


KANADA  SftTRAS  III,  2,  4.  117 


The  view  that  Mind  is  really  a  whole  made  up  of  parts,  like  a  leech 
and  that  by  its  contraction  and  expansion,  like  those  of  a    leech,  simul 
taneity  and  non-simultaneity  of  cognitions  are    respectively   produced 
is    opposed    by   the  fault  of  redundancy   in  the  supposition  of  its  parts! 
This  is  the  direction.  —  3. 

Marks  of  the  existence  of  the  Soul. 

ffpatkdra.  —  Now,  showing  the  purpose   of  the   violation  of  the  order   of  enumeration,   he 
,  with  a  view  to  complete  the  enquiry  into  the  Soul  : 


faftlft  II  ^  I  R  I  «  II 


Prana-Apana-Nimesa-Unmesa- 
Jivana-Manogati-Indriyantaravikarak,  ascending  life-breath,  descend 
ing  life-breath,  closing  the  eyelids,  opening  the  eyelids,  life,  the  move 
ment  of  the  Mind,  and  affections  of  the  other  senses.  g<Sf:^3fT^^SpJ5n: 
Sukha-Duhkha-Ichchha-Dvesa-Prayatna,  Pleasure,  Pain,  Desire,  Aver 
sion,  and  Volition,  ^r  Cha,  and.  ^n?*TT:  Atmanah,  of  the  Soul. 
f^jflf^r  Lingani,  marks. 

4.  The  ascending  life-breath,  the  descending  life-breath,  the 
closing  of  the  eye-lids,  the  opening  of  the  eye-lids,  life,  the  move 
ment  of  the  Mind,  and  the  affections  of  the  other  senses,  and  also 
Pleasure,  Pain,  Desire  ,  Aversion,  and  Volition  are  marks  (of  the 
•existence)  of  the  Soul.  —  159. 

It  must  not  be  imagined  that  cognition  itself  is  the  only  mark  of 
the  Soul.  There  are  also  the  ascending  life-breath,  etc.,  which  are  the» 
marks  of  the  Soul.  Thus  that  is  surely  the  Soul  in  consequence  of  the 
volition  of  which  the  upward  and  downward  motions  in  the  air  moving; 
within  the  body  and  characterised  as  the  ascending  and  the  desceud- 
ing  life-breath,  take  place,  not  being  possible  otherwise  than  by  voli 
tion,  just  as  the  throwing  upward  and  the  throwing  downward  of 
a  pestle,  etc-,  (in  a  mortar,  etc.),  are  not  possible  without  volition. 
For,  Air,  the  nature  of  which  is  to  blow  obliquely,  cannot  undergo 
sush  cha-ige  of  nature  without  volitioa.  It  cannot  be  said  that  two 
bodies  of  Air  flowing  in  opposite  directions  and  producing  different 
effects  may,  like  two  similar  bodies  of  water,  have  an  upward 
motion.  For,  were  this  the  case,  there  would  be  then  the  upward 
motion  only  but  not  the  downward  motion,  nor  oblique  motion  as 
in  exsufflation  or  blowing  by  the  mouth.  There  is  then  a  being, 
who,  by  his  volition,  impels  the  air  upwards  or  downwards. 
I  cannot  be  asked  how  there  could  be  upward  and  downward  motions 
of  the  ascending  and  descending  life-breaths  in  a  state  of  deep  or 
dream-less  sleep  ;  for,  at  that  time,  though  volition  proper  does  not 
exist,  there  exists  another  kind  of  volition  which  is  called  volition  the 
source  of  vitality.  In  like  manner,  the  closing  and  the  opening  -of  the 
eye-lids  also  infer  a  presiding  agent  in  the  organism.  Thus  the  closing; 
of  the  eye-lide  (nimesa)  in  an  action  which  produces  the  conjunction. 
of  the  lids  of  the  eye  ;  unmesa  or  the  opening  of  the  eye-lids  is  an  action. 


118  VAI&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


•which  produces  their  disjunction.  These  two  actions,  being  cons 
tantly  produced  without  any  visible  cause  such  as  molecular  motion, 
impact,  etc.,  are  not  produced  otherwise  than  by  volition.  As  the  danc 
ing  of  a  wooden  manikin  depends  upon  some  one's  volition,  so  also  does 
the  dancing  of  the  eye-lids.  Thereby  an  entity,  possessing  volition,  is- 
inferred.  Similarly,  life  also  is  a  mark  of  the  Soul.  Thus  by  the 
word  '  life  '  the  effects  of  vitality,  such  as  growth,  the  building  up  of 
wounds,  fractures,  etc.,  are  indicated  by  implication.  So  that  as  the 
owner  of  a  house  builds  up  a  broken  edifice  or  enlarges  a  building 
which  is  too  small,  so  the  presiding  agent  of  the  organism  effects,  by 
food  etc.,  the  increase  of  enlargement  of  the  organism  which  is  to  him  in 
the  stead  of  a  habitation,  and  with  medicine  and  the  like,  causes  what 
is  wounded  to  grow  again,  and  broken  hands  and  feet  to  grow  together 
again.  Thus  like  the  master  of  a  house,  at  guardian  of  the  body  is  also 
proved.  In  the  same  way,  the  movement  of  the  Mind  also  is  a  mark  of 
the  Soul.  Thus  it  has  been  proved,  in  the  foregoing  section,  that  the 
Mind  is  something  moulded  or  ponderable  (m&rto*)  and  that  it  is  indivisi 
ble.  Its  application  to  a  sense  percipient  of  the  desired  object  is 
dependent  upon  desire  and  attention.  So  that  the  inference  is  that  the 
Soul  is  that  being  whose  desire  and  attention  direct  the  Mind,  as  a  boy 
standing  at  the  corner  of  a  room  sends  a  top  or  ball  of  lac  hither  and 
thither  within  the  room  itself. 

It  may  be  objected,  "  The  dancer  of  the  wooden  manikin,  the 
master  of  a  house,  or  the  boy  (referred  to  above)  is  not  different  from 
his  body,  30  that  he  could  be  adduced  as  an  example.  Moreover,  it  is 
the  body  which  is  the  seat  of  consciousness  inasmuch  as  it  is  the  object 
of  the  sense  of  I-ness  (a/iam/cdra)  ;  for,  there  are  tl  lam  fair/'  "  I  am 
stout/'  and  the  like  intuitions  which  are  co-extensive  with  I-ness.  It 
may  be  urged  that,  on  this  theory,  a  man  would  not  recollect  in  his 
youth  or  old  age  wrhat  he  perceived  in  his  boyhood,  because  as  in  the 
case  of  a  difference  of  bodies,  like  those  of  Chaitra  and  Maitra,  so  here 
too  there  would  be  no  recognition,  on  the  maxim,  "  One  does  not  remem 
ber  what  another  saw."  Here  we  may  point  out  that  Chaitra  and 
Maitra  being  two  different  currents,  there  may  not  be  any  correlatior, 
whereas  (in  the  case  of  a  single  indvidual)  in  syite  of  the  differences  of 
boyhood  and  youth,  the  current  being  the  same,  correlation  by  means 
of  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect  will  be  possible.''  To  this  argument 
we  Mill  reply  that  it  would  follow,  on  the  above  theory,  that  the  son  also 
would  remember  what  was  perceived  by  the  father.  If  it  be  rejoined 
that  perception  of  the  difference  of  body  prevents  this,  we  reply  that 
correlation  (in  the  form  of  recollection)  will  not  be  possible  also  in  the 
case  of  an  old  man  who  perceives  his  present  body  only  as  different 
from  the  body  which  he  had  as  a  boy,  and  also  that  there  is  no  percep 
tion  of  the  difference  of  body  for  a  boy  who  has  nevor  known  his 
father.  In  "  My  body,"  the  sense  of  I-ness  appears  as  identical  with 
the  sense  of  '  My-ness  '  Cand  not  as  identical  with  the  intuition  of  the 
body).  If  it  be  replied  that  the  same  holds  good  in  the  case  of  "  My 
Soul  "  also  ;  wo  reply  that  it  does  not,  because  the  use  of  '  My'  is  there 
topical,  since  the  genitive  may  be  used  even  where  there  is  no  differ 
ence,  as  in  "  The  head  of  Rahu  "  (Rahu  being  all  head).  The  consequ 
ences  of  killing,  etc.,  (i.  e.,  Merits  and  Demerits)  also  will  not  result  to- 
the  agent  or  doer,  as  his  body  will  be  different  and  different  (at  every 


KANlDA  SfrTRAS  III,  2,  5.  119 

stage  of  transmigration).  Further,  (on  your  theory),  consciousness 
being  limited  to  the  bhutas  or  elements  (which  constitute  the  body  and 
are  different  at  every  new  birth),  if  a  man  desires  a  sinful  act,  he  will 
escape  the  consequences  of  his  own  acts,  and  there  will  be  also  the 
defect  of  the  acquisition  of  the  results  of  acts  not  done  by  him  who 
experiences  them-  This  is  the  point. 

"  From  the  affections  of  the  other  senses." — For  surely  is  observed 
an  overflow  of  the  salivary  juice  ,  induced  by  a  strong  desire  for  the 
taste,  of  one  who,  after  experiencing  the  particular  taste,  accompanied 
by  the  particular  colour,  of  an  orange  or  a  chira-vilva,  observes  such 
fruit  again.  Now,  this  cannot  take  place  without  the  inference  of  the 
acid  taste  ;  nor  the  inference,  without  the  recollection  of  the  universal 
relation  or  invariable  co-existence  (of  the  taste  and  the  colour);  nor  the 
recollection,  without  impression  (Samskdra)  ;  nor  the  impression,  with 
out  the  experience  of  the  universal  relation  ;  nor  the  experience,  with 
out  repeated  observation.  This  concatenation  of  cognitions,  standing 
to  one  another  in  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect,  cannot  be  possible 
without  (the  existence  of)  a  selfsame  agent.  Thus  there  is  the  Sutram 
of  Gautama.  "  From  the  affections  of  the  other  sense."  (Ny  ay  a- Sutram. 
I1II.  i.  12). 

Pleasure  and  the  like  also  are  to  be  regarded,  like  cognition,  as  marks 
of  the  Soul.  Thus  pleasure  and  the  like  must  reside  somewhere  or  must 
reside  in  some  substance,  because  they  are  things  which  are  produced, 
or  qualities  like  colour,  etc.  Hence  an  inference  by  analogy,  accom 
panied  by  an  exclusion  of  other  possibilities,  takes  for  its  subject 
inherence  or  residence  in  a  Substance  other  than  the  eight  Substances. 
For  the  proposition  that  desire  which  does  not  reside  in  Earth  and  seven 
other  Substances,  resides  in  a  Substance,  is  not  complete  unless  it  assu 
mes  as  its  mood  the  being  resident  in  a  Substance  other  than  the  eight 
Substances.  Where,  however,  exclusion  of  other  possibilities  does  not 
appear  at  first,  there  the  being  resident  in  a  Substance  other  than  the 
eight  substances,  will  have  to  be  proved  by  argument  from  effect  to  cause  or 
negative  reasoning.  This  is  the  distinction.  It  is  absurd  to  say  that 
inference  has  only  the  mjod  of  that  which  determines  the  universal 
relation  ;  for  that  alone  is  the  mood  there  without  which  the  intuition 
or  inference  would  not  result.  Otherwise,  in  "  A  dyad  not  being 
resident  in  an  effect,  must  reside  somewhere,  because  it  is  a  whole  made 
up  of  parts,"  and  such  other  cases,  there  would  be  no  inference  having 
for  its  mood  the  being  resident  in  a  noneffect. — 4. 

Soul  is  a  substance,  and  is    eternal. 

Upaskdra. — Well,  granted  that  there  is  proof  of  a  fixed   Soul.     But  whenoa    is  it   eternal 
and  whence  is  it  a  Substance  ?     To  meet  this   obj action,  he  says  : 


M  I  *  I  VI  •« 

Tasya,  its,  of  the  Soul.  ^sqwf^Rq^  Dravyatva-nityatve,  Subs 
tance-ness  and  eternality.  ^T<HI  Vayuna,  by  Air.  5qr<?q[^  Vyakhyate, 
•explained. 

5.     Its   Substance-ness  and   eternality   are  explained  by  (the 
•explanation  of  the  Substance-ness  and  eternality  of)  Air.— 140. 


120  VAlSESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

As  there  is  no  proof  for  the    supposition  of    parts    in    the    ultimate- 
atom  of  Air,  and  therefore  Air  is  eternal,  so  also  in  the  case  of  the  Soul. 

As  the  ultimate  atom    of  Air  is  a    Substance,    because    it   possesses- 
attributes,  so  also  is  the  Soul.     This  is  the  meaning 5. 

Objection  :  I.     Mark  of  the  Soul,    not  visible. 
Upatkdra. — Ho  cites  an  objection  of  the  opposite  party  to  the  foregoing  conclusion  : 


\:  Yajnadattah,  He  is  Yajnadatta.  tffr  Iti,  this,  sfa^  Sannikarese,. 
there  being  contact.  M*ft!l*J|«Ucl  Pratyaksabhavat,  from  the  absence  of 
perception.  Because  there  is  no  perception.  eg  Dristam,  visible, 
Lingam,  mark,  f  Na,  not.  fau^  Vidyate,  exists. 


6.     There    is    no   visible    mark  (of  the  existence  of  the  Soul),. 
because    there    being    contact   (of   the   senses   with    the    body  of 
Yajnadatta),    perception    does    not   arise    that    this   Soul  is  Yajna 
datta).—  141. 

There  being  contact,  if  no  such  perception  take  place  as  "  This  is 
YajSadatta,"  then  there  is  no  visible  mark,  i.  e.,  no  mark  the  universal 
relation  of  which  with  the  sddhya  or  what  has  to  be  proved,  has  been 
grasped  by  perception.  The  meaning  is  that  as  smoke,  perceived  as 
accompanying  tire  which  is  perceptible,  is  a  visible  mark  in  the  case 
of  fire,  so  there  is  no  such  visible  mark  which  can  estaclish  the  ex 
istence  of  the  Soul.  —  6. 


IJpaskdra.  —  Lest  it  might  be  urged,  "  Although  no  visible  mark  exists,  the  universal 
relation  of  which  has  been  observed  by  perception,  yet  a  sdmdnyatcdrittam,  or  commonly- 
observed  or  analogous  mark,  will  be  the  mark,  for  it  is  not  that  there  can  be  no  inference  from 
that,"  therefore  the  objector  says  : 


:  II  ^  I  R  I  v* 

Samanyato-dristat,  from  a  commonly-observed  or  analo 


gous  mark.  ^  Cha,  and.  uf^fa:  Avisesah,  non-particular.     Not  a    thing 
in  particular  or  as  such. 

7.     And     from     a    commonly-observed    mark    (there    is)    no 
(inference  of  anything  in)  particular.  —  142. 

A  commonly-observed  mark  also  becomes  a  mark  of  inference.  But 
it  does  not  prove  the  Soul  as  Soul,  nor  as  a  Substance  over  and  above 
the  eight  Substances.  It  would  only  prove  that  desire,  etc.,  must  be 
resident  somewhere.  And  this  does  not  suggest  the  thought  of  a  Soul. 
This'  is  the  meaning.  Therefore  it  is  stated,  "  Not  a  thing  in 
particular."  —  7. 

3.  —  Therefore  Soul   proved  by  Revelation. 


eins 


Upskdra.—Are  then  the  texts  of  the   Vedas,  for  instance,  "  He  is  the  Soul,  in  whom  all 
are  killed,"  etc.,  meaningless  ?     Apprehending  this,  the  same  objector  says  : 


KANlDA  SftTRAS  III,  2,  9.  121 


n  ^  i  R  i  c  n 

Tasmat,  therefore,  because   the    Soul    cannot    be   proved    by 
reasoning.  ^Tlf^:  Agamikah,  scriptural,  proved  by  the  revealed  texts. 

8.     Therefore  (the  Soul  is)  proved  by  Revelation.  —  143. 

The  Soul  is  really  proved  by  Revelation  only,  but  not  by  inference, 
since  visible  and  commonly-observed  marks  do  not  exist.  Therefore, 
mental  vision  of  the  principles  or  essences  of  things  results  from  the 
proper  hearing  of  the  Upanisads,  and  not  from  the  course  of  intellec 
tion.  So  that  this  Regulation  (i.  e.}  the  Vaisesika  system),  which 
teaches  intellection,  is  no  regulation.  For,  it  is  observed  in  the  case  of 
"  ten  ghosts,  swimming  across  the  river,"  etc.,  that  the  cognition  of  the 
person  who  has  representation  of  these  things  in  his  consciousness, 
arises  only  from  the  very  instructions  that  ten  ghosts  dwell  on  this 
tree,  that  such  and  such  an  object  floats  across  the  river,  etc.).  —  8, 

Objections  answerd. 

Upaskdra.  —  Toi  this  objection  of  the  first  party,  set   forth  in   the   three   foregoing    sdtras, 
the  upholder  of  the  doctrine  of  inference  replies  : 


Aham.  I.      ff^T  Iti,  this,  Jffs^T   Sabdasya,  of    the    word. 


Vyatirekat,  exclusion,    non-application,  divergence,    abhorrence,  T  Na, 
not,  ^Hlfr^'J^  Agamikam,  Scriptural.     Proved  by  Revelation. 

9.  (The  proof  of  the  existence  of  the  Soul  is  not  solely)  from 
revelation,  because  of  the  non-application  of  the  word  T  (to  other 
designates  or  objects).—  144. 

Revelation    alone   is    not    the    proof  of  the    existence    of    Soul  ;  but 

the    Soul    is  proved  also  by  the  inference  that  the   word  *  I/  or  the  word 

*Soul/  must  have   some  designate    (or    objective    reality    corresponding- 

to    it),    because    it    is    a    word,    like    the   word,  water-pot,    etc.     Lest  it 

might  be  said  that  it  is  Earth,  etc.,  which  are  its  designates,    so  he  says,. 

"Because  of  non-application,"  in  other  words,    because  of  the  non-appli 

cation  or  divergence  of  the  word  'i'    from  Earth,    etc.     For,  there  never 

arises    any    such    use    of  language  or  intuition  as  "I  am  Earth,"    "I  am, 

Water,"    "I    am    Fire,"    "I    am    Air,"  I  am    Ether,"  "I  am  Time,"  I  am 

Space,"    "I  am    Mind."    If   you  object  that  such  intuition  or  use  arises 

with   respect    to  the    body,  we  reply  that  it  does  not,  for  it   would  then 

entail  such  intuition  or  use  with  respect  to  the  bodies  of    others  ;  if,  that 

it  arises  with  respect  to  one's  own  body,  we  reply  that  it    is    not  so,  for 

*one's   own'  or  one's  self,  as  different  from   the  Soul,  has  no  meaning  or 

is  not  proved  by  etymology,    and    because   the    intuition,  "  My  body," 

proceeds  upon  a  difference  of  substrata.     It  cannot  be    said,   (objection) 

"Well,  but  this  too  is  an  inference  by    analogy  which  however  does  not 

and  with  a  particular  thing,  and  is  therefore  defective  ;  "  for,  (answer) 

in    the   word  'I,'    I-ness  or  Soul-ness   itself    forms  the   specification    or 

distinction.     So   that  on  the  strenght  of  the  property  of   its   being    an 


122  VAlSESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


attribute  of  the  subject  of  the  argument  (pafoa),  it  follows  that  I-ness 
is  the  cause  of  the  inference  of  Soul,  and  as  it  is  not  common  to  any 
other  object,  therefore  the  particular  object  (or  the  Soul  in  parti 
cular)  is  proved.  Similarly,  there  is  proof  of  the  particular  object, 
from  the  analogous  inference  or  commonly  observed  mark  accompained 
with  the  exclusion  of  other  possibilities.  The  objection  which  has  been 
made,  namely,  "  From  '  hearing  '  alone  results  realization  or  intuition 
of  the  Soul  ;  what  is  the  need  of  all  this  proof  ?",  is  not  sound.  For, 
without  reflection  or  intellection,  the  dross  of  unbelief  in  wavering 
minds  cannot  be  purged  away  ;  without  this  purification,  there  can 
be  no  aptitude  in  them  for  constant  meditation  ;  and  without  constant 
meditation,  there  can  be  no  realization  of  truth  or  intuition  of  the 
Soul,  which  is  capable  of  uprooting  false  knowledge  together  with 
desires  or  appetencies,  as  it  is  from  habit  only  that  a  sad  lover 
suddenly  comes  to  have  a  mental  realization  of  his  beloved  lady,  and 
because  verbal  or  inferential  knowledge  is  not  capable  of  uprooting 
false  knowledge,  as  is  seen  in  the  case  of  delusion  in  respect  of  direc 
tion  in  Space,  etc.  This  is  the  import. 

If  it  be  asked,  "Still  how  can  a  sign  or  indication  (of  its  existence) 
be  apprehended  in  the  Soul  which  is  imperceptible  '?",  we  reply,  "Who 
has  ever  said  that  the  Soul  is  not  perceptible  ?  On  the  contrary,  the 
Soul  is  apprehended  by  its  proximity  through  or  in  the  form  of  con 
junction,  to  the  Mind.  Otherwise,  how  can  there  be  such  intuitions  as 
'I  am  happy,'  'I  know,'  'I  desire,'  'I  will/  'I  feel  pain,'  etc  ?  For  these 
intuitions  are  neither  unsubstantial  nor  of  doubtful  substantiality, 
because  like  that  of  the  perception  of  blueness,  their  substantiality  is 
undoubted.  Nor  are  they  inferential  or  derived  from  marki,  for  they 
arise  even  without  any  knowledge  of  marks.  Nor  again  are  they 
derived  from  verbal  information  or  authority,  for  they  do  not  follow 
upon  enquiry  for  that."  If  it  be  urged  that  they  are  appearances  of 
perception  (and  not  true  perceptions),  we  reply  that  they  must  have 
then  for  their  object  something  which  is  not  apparent  (i.e,  real),  for 
it  will  be  shown  in  the  sequel  that  that  which  is  not  object  of  certain 
knowledge,  cannot  be  applied  by  metaphor  to  or  superimposed  upon, 
another  object  —  9. 


The  s&tram  is  illustrative.  It  should  be  known  that 
inferences,  as  described  above,  by  the  marks  of  knowledge,  etc.,  are 
also  proofs  of  the  existence  of  the  Soul. 

Counter-objection  stated. 

Upaskdra.  —  "If  this   be  so    (i.e.,   if  the   Soul    can  be  known  by  sense-perception),"  the 
objector  says,  "then  what  is  the  need'of  inference  ?" 


n  ^  i  ^  i  to  ii 

qft  Yadi,  if.  $j  Dristam,  observation.  3T?5Rf  Anvaksam,  sensuous. 
*Tf*  Aham',  I.  ^JrT:  Devadattah,  Devadatta.  ST?"  Aham,  I  qjTT?T:  Yajna- 
dattah,  Yajnadatta.  ?f>r  Iti,  such. 


10.  If  (there  are)  such  sensuous  observations  (or  perceptions) 
as  'I  am  Devadatta,'  'I  am  Yajfiadatta,'  (then  there  is  no  need  of 
inference).  —  145. 


KANlDA  StfTRAS  III,  2,  11.  123 

The  word  'iti'  marks  the  form  of  knowldge,  In  'dristam,'  the  affix 
<kta'  is  used  in  a  passive  sense.  'Anvaksain'  means  sensuous  or  per 
ceptual.  Therefore  the  meaning  is  :  if  there  is  perceptual  or  sensuous 
observation  in  the  form  of  'This  is  Devadatta,'  'This  is  YajEadatta/ 
then  what  is  the  use  of  taking  the  troule  of  making  an  inference  ? 
"For  an  elephant  being  in  sight  or  observation,  those  who  infer,  do  not 
infer  it  by  its  screaming."  —  10. 

Above  answered. 
Upaskdra.—To  this  the  advocate  of  Inference  says  : 


f*Tf 


II 


52  Driste,  (lit.  Seen),  grasped  by  perception,  sn^fr  Atmani,  the  soul. 

Linge,  being  accompanied  with  marks.  W:  Ekah,  one.  ^  Eva,  only 
Dridhatvat,  because  it  becomes  more  firm  or  fixed.  W9T*H<t.  Praty- 
aksavat,  like  other  percepts  or  perceptions.  SRgq:  Pratyayah,  intuition. 
Belief. 

11.  As  in  the  case  of  other  percepts,  so,  if  the  Soul,  which  is 
grasped  by  perception,  is  also  accompained  with,  or  comes  at  the 
top  of,  marks  (from  which  it  can  be  inferred),  then,  by  means  of, 
confirmation,  the  intuition  becomes  fastened  to  one  and  only  one 
object.  —  146. 

'  Driste/  i.  e.,  grasped  by  perception  ;  l  atmani  '  ;  '  linge/  i.  e.,  having 
all  its  marks  or  causes  developed  ;  eka  eva,,  i.e.,  having  one  object  only 
as  its  matter  ;  '  pratyayah/  '  Pratyayah  '  implies  the  expulsion  of  all 
apprehension  of  error.  "  How  can  it  be  so  ?  "  Hence  he  says,  '  dridha- 
tvat/  i.  e.,  because  the  current  of  proof  is  capable  of  removing  the 
apprehension  of  its  being  otherwise.  He  gives  an  example,  'pratyksavat'; 
i.  e.,  as  even  when  there  is  perception  of  water  from  a  distance,  yet 
inference  of  water  by  the  mark  of  the  baldkds  (water  birds)  is  made  for 
the  purpose  of  corroboration.  So  it  has  been  said,  "Skilful  logicians 
desire  to  understand  by  inference  even  what  is  grasped  by  perception." 
The  import  here  is  this  :  Although  at  times  the  Soul  really  shines  in 
mental  perception,  yet,  like  knowledge,  produced  by  the  flash  of  light 
ning,  it  does  not  derive  so  much  fixity  or  permanence  being  overclouded 
by  such  other  conflicting  perceptions  as  "  I  am  fair,"  li  I  am  lean/'  and 
the  like.  Here  another  form  of  knowledge  produced  by  marks  which 
cannot  but  lead  to  their  proper  inference,  confirms  or  fixes  the  very 
knowledge  previously  obtained  from  perception.  Moreover,  inference 
must  be  applied  to  the  Soul  owing  to  the  desire  to  infer  the  knowledge 
that  intellection  of  the  Soul  as  taught  in  the  precepts  "(The  Soul) 
should  be  heard  about,  reflected  upon,"  and  the  like,  is  a  means  towarda 
the  realization  of  that  which  is  desirable,  i.  e.,  the  Supreme  Good. 
Because  if  there  be  no  intellection  of  the  Soul,  then  constant  medita 
tion  would  be  impossible,  and  consequently  there  would  be  no  realiza 
tion  of  the  Soul  in  the  understanding,  and  so  salvation  would  be 
impossible.  This  is  the  purport. 


124  VAI£E§IKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

The  statement  of  the  two  separate  intutitions,  'I  am  Devadatta,' 
and  "  I  am  Yajnadatta,"  in  the  foregoing  Sutrara,  is  intended  to  show 
that  there  can  be  only  individual  intutition  of  every  Soul.  —  11. 

Counter-objection  stated  and  answered. 

Upaskdra.—'"  Well,"  it  may  ba  objected,  "  if  the  intutition,  '  I  am  Yajnadatta  '  refers 
to  the  Soul,  then  the  appearance  (of  the  notion  Yajnadatta)  as  co-existing  in  the  samo  snbs- 
tratum  with  Going,  as  in  '  Yajnadatta  goes,'  is  impossible."  So  he  says  : 


:  Devadattah,  Devadatta.  JT^fcf  Grachchhati,  goes.  ?nr^rT:  Yajna- 
dattah,  Yajnadatta.  JT^ajfa  Gachchhati,  goes.  ffrt  Iti,  such.  These. 
S*HKI?J  Upacharat,  by  transference.  SKft  Sarire,  in  the  body.  R9iq: 
Pratyayah,  intutition.  Belief. 

12.     'Davadatta  goes,'  'Yajladatta  goes,'  —  in  these  cases,  the 
belief  (that  their  respective  bodies  go)  is  due  to  transference.  —  147. 

For  there  are  such  intutitions  as  "  I  am  fair,"  "  I  am  stout,"  and 
there  is  also  such  differential  intutitiou  as  "  My  body."  Now,  in 
"  Devadatta  goes,"  the  perception  of  co-existence  with  motion,  and 
the  use  of  language  to  express  it,  are  topical,  whereas  the  intutition 
lt  my  "  is  real  as  carrying  its  own  meaning.  Although  the  property  of 
being  Devadatta  is  a  jdti,  kind  or  genus,  existing  in  the  body  whereby 
the  use  of  language  as  Devadatta  goes  "  is  in  the  primary  sense  and 
the  intutition  is  true  in  its  own  meaning,  yet  if  the  term  Devadatta  be 
applied  to  the  Soul  delimited  by  it,  it  is  then  to  be  understood  as  a 
transferred  epithet. 

Another  objection. 
Upaskdra.  —  Here  he  apprehends  (an  objection): 


:  II  \  [  *  I 

Sandigdhah,  doubtful.  3   Tu,  however.  ST^T*:    Upacharah, 
Transference. 

13.     The  transference,  however,  is  doubtful.  —  148. 

The  word  'tu'  points  out  the  opponent's  view.  The  intutition  and 
the  use  of  the  word,  'I,'  are  observed  both  in  respect  of  the  Soul  and 
body.  Therefore  the  doubt  arises  which  intutition  and  expression  be 
the  primary,  and  which  the  secondary  ones.  —  13. 

Above  answered. 
t7pAskdra.—"'H.&  solves  the  (doubt: 


Aham,  I.ff^T  Iti,  this.  U3(J||wPt  Pratyag-atmani,  in  the  in-going  or 
individual    Soul.   *TRT^  Bhavat,   because   it    exists.  *&.%   Paratra,  other- 


KANiDA  SftTRAS  III,  2,  15.  125 


where.  SRTWC  Abhavat,  because  it  does  not  exist.  ?TO???TCSlW^r:  Arthantara- 
pratyaksah,  (Intuition)  wherein  the  individual  soul  is  the  object  of 
perception. 

14.  Because  the  intuition  T  exists  in  one's  own  soul,  and 
because  it  does  not  exist  otherwhere,  therefore  the  intuition  has 
the  individual  Soul  as  the  object  of  perception.—  149. 

'  Arthantara-pratyaksah  '  is  that  intuition  in  which  l  arthantaram,* 
i.  e.,  the  Soul  itself,  is  the  percept.  The  meaning  is  as  follows  :  Since  the 
intuition  '  I  '  arises  in  respect  of  '  pratyagatma/  i.  e.,  one's  own  Soul, 
and  since  it  does  not  arise  '  paratra  '  i.  e.,  in  respect  of  other  Souls, 
therefore  it  is  proper  to  regard  the  reference  to  'arthantaram'  or  one's 
own  Soul  as  the  primary  reference.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  primary- 
reference  were  to  the  body,  then  the  intuition  whould  be  produced  by 
the  external  senses,  for  the  body  is  not  an  object  of  mental  perception, 
and  the  intuition  '  This  is  I  '  is  mental  being  produced  even  without 
the  operation  of  the  external  senses,  since  the  mind  takes  in  as  its 
object  the  Soul  as  modified  by  appropriate  particular  attributes  in  the 
form  of  '  I  am  happy/  <  I  know,'  *  I  will,'  '  I  desire,'  This  intuition  is 
not  inferential,  as  it  is  produced  even  without  seeking  any  mark  of 
inference.  Nor  is  it  verbally  communicated,  since  it  is  produced  even 
•without  the  apprehension  of  any  authoritative  text.  Therefore  it  is 
•only  mental  ;  further  because  the  mind,  as  it  is  not  an  independent  agent 
-outside  its  own  sphere,  does  not  apply  into  the  body  and  other  external 
objects.  Moreover,  if  it  be  urged  that,  if  it  referred  to  the  body,  it 
would  refer  to  the  bodies  of  others,  and  if  it  referred  to  one's  own  Soul, 
it  would  also  refer  to  the  Souls  of  others  ;  we  deny  this,  for  the  Soul  of 
one  man  is  beyond  the  senses  of  another,  since  its  particular  attributes 
have  no  fitness  for  or  relation  to,  them,  and  since  its  fitness  for  or  rela 
tion  to,  them  arises  from  the  taking  on  or  super-imposition  of  appro 
priate  particular  attributes.  Nor  is  this  the  nature  of  the  Soul  only, 
but  of  every  Substance.  For  Substanc^  becomes  perceptible  only  by 
the  taking  on  of  appropriate  particular  attributes.  If  it  is  said  that 
Ether  also  should,  for  the  same  reason,  become  perceptible  by  the 
accompaniment  of  Sound,  we  reply  that  such  would  be  the  case,  if  the 
car  were  capable  of  apprehending  Substance,  or  if  Ether  possessed 
colour.  If  it  is  rejoined  that  the  Soul  also  is  equally  devoid  of  colour, 
we  reply  that  it  is  in  the  case  of  external  Substances  only  that  posses 
sion  of  colour  is  a  requisite  with  regard  to  perceptibility.  The  word 
•'  pratyag,'  in-going,  points  out  divergence  from  others.  —  14. 

Another  objection. 
Upaskdra.  —  He  apprehends  another  objection   : 


I  11  U  II 

Devadattalj,   Devadatta.  »T5a[%  G-achchhati,  goes.  tf$f  Iti,  thii. 
,  from   transference.  Sfflwr'rtfJ,  Abhimanat,  from  fancy, 


126  VIAgESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

reference  to  Soul,  Conceit,  Egotism,  or  Self-identification.  rTT^  Tavatr 
because,  therefore,  JU^fkuw^r  Sarirapratyksah  having  the  body  as  the 
object.  ?T5"^n!:  Ahankarah,  ahamkara.  The  intuition  of  I.  I-ness. 

15.  The  intuition  of  'I'  has  the  body  for  its  object.  There 
fore  to  say  that,  in  'Devadatta  goes,'  there  is  a  transference  (of 
epithet),  is  a  mere  fancy.  —  150. 

'  Ahankarah,'  i.  e.,  the  intuition  of  '  I.'  It  is  '  Sarirapratyaksah/ 
i.  e.,  that  which  has  the  body  as  the  percept  or  subject-matter.  You 
have  determined  that  the  intuition  or,  for  the  matter  of  that  the  expres 
sion,  "  Devadatta  goes,  "  is  due  to  transference.  Now,  this  transference 
is  a  fancied  one,  because  such  intuitions  and  expressions  as  "  I  am 
fair,"  "  I  am  lean,"  "  I  am  fortunate,  my  brith  is  a  mere  repetition/' 
and  the  like,  cannot  be  reconciled  on  the  theory  of  transference.  This 
is  the  meaning.  —  15. 

Above  answered. 

Upatkdra.  —  He  gives  the  solution: 

'»  U  ^  I  Rl 


r:  Sandigdhah,  doubtful,  g  Tu,  but.  HHK'     Upacharah,  trans 
ference. 

16.     The   transference,    (as   characterised   by  you),  however, 
is  doubtful.—  151. 

The  word  Hu  '  here  points  out  the  solution  (of  the  foregoing  objec 
tion).  The  meaning  is  that  there  is  doubt  even  in  what  has  been  said 
(by  you,  ».  e.,  the  opponent^),  namely  that  the  transference  is  a  fancied 
one,  whereas  the  intuition  of  '  I  '  is  in  respect  of  the  body  itself.  Since, 
therefore,  the  intuition  is  a  false  witness  on  either  side,  we  must  endea 
vour  to  find  out  a  distinction.  Since  on  making  this  endeavour,  we 
observe  that  even  a  man,  whose  eyes  have  been  closed,  still  has  the  intui 
tion  of  '  I,'  we  must  hold  that  it  refers  to  an  object  different  from  the 
body,  and  beyond  the  cognizance  of  the  external  senses.  If  it  referred  to 
the  body,  it  would  reter  to  the  bodies  of  others,  and  also  would  not  take 
place  in  independence  of  the  eyes.  If  it  be  asked  how  there  can  be 
such  common  measure  or  co-extension  as  in  "I  who  am  stout  or  thin,. 
am  happy;"  we  reply  that  in  this  case  it  is  possible  that  the  body 
would  appear  as  the  condition  of  pleasure,  etc.,  as  in  "  This  forest  is 
resonant  with  the  roar  of  a  lion  "  (there  is  such  appearance).  Mere 
I-ness,  presented  by  the  Mind,  is  superimposed  upon  the  body,  just  as 
heat,  presented  by  the  organ  of  touch,  in  the  judgments,  "  The  water 
is  hot,  "  "  The  body  is  hot/'  etc  __  16. 

Above  answered  —  continued. 
UpaslcAra.  —  By  elaborating  the  solution  ihe  says  : 

:  \\\ 

«T   Na,  not.  3    Tu,  but.    *Ftt*ft$qRt  $arira-vifiesat,    perceiving  the  di 
fference  of   bodies,  qv^foa^fa^:  Yajnadatta-Visnumitrayoh,  of    Yajna 


KANADA  StiTRAS  III,  2,  18.  127 


datta  and  Visnumitra.  $n*f  Jnanam,  knowledge,    thought,  fc^:  Visayah, 

object 

17.  But  the  thoughts  of  Yajfiadatta  and  Visnumitra  do  not 
become  objects  of  perception  to  them,  while  they  perceive  the 
difference  of  their  bodies.  (Therefore  consciousness  is  not  an 
attribute  of  the  body).—  152. 

'  Jnanam'  implies  sensible  pleasure,  pain,  and  other  attributes  of 
the  Soul.  As  the  bodies  of  Yajnadatta  and  Visnumitra  are  mutually 
•different,  so  are  also  their  knowledge,  pleasure,  pain,  and  the  like 
different.  Accordingly,  as  is  this  body  of  Yajnadatta,  so  also,  though 
no  knowledge,  or  pleasure,  etc.,  be  produced  in  \  ajnadatta,  will  the 
knowledge,  etc.,  "I  feel  pleasure,"  "I  know"  "  I  will,  "  "  I  desire,  "  be 
objects  (of  perception)  ;  because  the  sensible  body  being  an  object  of 
perception,  knowledge,  etc.,  which  are  (ex  hypothesi)  its  properties,  like 
its  colour,  etc.,  will  have  the  possibility  of  being  perceptible.  But  this 
i?  imposible.  Therefore  Csuch  is  the  import),  it  should  be  said  that  the 
seat  or  subject  of  knowledge,  etc.,  is  something  really  different  from 
the  body.  l  ^ariraviiesat'  means  from  difference  of  body.  The  fifth 
case-ending  has  been  used  in  the  sense  of  the  infinitive.  So  that  the 
meaning  is  that  knowledge  or  thought  is  not  an  object  of  perception, 
while  difference  of  body  is  being  perceived.  —  17. 

Proof  of  Soul  not  from    Revelation  only. 

Upaskdra.  —  It  may  bo  objected  as  follows  :  —  "  The  Soul  ia  not  perceptible,  since,  like 
Ether,  it  is  a  colourless  Substance,  or  a  Substance  without  component  parts.  Therefore  th« 
body  itself  should  be  affirmed  to  be  the  object  of  the  cognition  "  I  am  thin,  pale."  If 
occasionally  there  arises  also  the  consciousness  "  I  feel  pleasure,"  it  is  proper  to  suppose 
that  pleasure  and  the  like  becoming  manifest  without  a  substratum,  are  transferred  to  or 
superimposed  upon  the  body.  As  in  "  Hot,  fragrant  water,"  heat  and'  fragrance  appearing 
without  a  substratum  are  superimposed  upon  water,  but  for  the  sake  of  this  the  intuition  of 
water  also  does  not  contain  as  its  object  anything  except  common  water  ;  so  1-ness  in  "I 
am  "  is  real  only  in  reference  to  the  body,  whereas  pleasure  and  the  like  are  sometimes 
superimposed  upon  it.  There  is  then,  in  respect  of  the  Soul,  no  knowledge  of  it  in  the  form 
of  perception.  That  which  has  to  be  supposed  as  the  substratum  of  pleasure,  etc.,  must  be 
established  by  revelation.  There  is  no  perception  of  it."  In  reply  to  this  objection,  he  says  • 


II  \  \  ^  \ 

Aham,  I.  $fr  Iti,  this,  g^qfrq^f  Mukhya-yogyabhyam,  by  innate 
or  self-evident  and  perceptive  or  sensible  cognition.  3^^  J§hbdavat, 
like  sound.  sqf^fojfsqfiRrTCT^  Vyatirekabyabhicharat,  from  the  invari 
ability  of  absence  or  divergence,  f^qfa^:  ViSesa-siddheh,  frcm  proof  in 


particular.     ^     Na,     not.    ?Hqfa^r:        gamikah,    scriptural,     proved    by 
revelation. 

18.  (The  soul  is)  not  proved  (only)  by  Revelation,  since,  (as 
Ether  is  proved  by  Sound,  so)  (the  Soul  is)  proved  in  particular,  by 
the  innate  as  well  as  the  sensible  cognition  in  the  form  of  'I,' 
accompained  by  the  invariable  divergence  (of  such  cognition  from 
all  other  things),  as  is  the  case  with  Sound.  —  153. 


128  VAI£E§IKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

This  is  the  meaning.  The  cognition,  "  I  feel  pleasure,"  or  "  I  am 
in  pain/'  is  neither  scriptural,  nor  verbally  communicated,  nor  in 
ferential,  since  it  arises  even  without  the  help  of  verbal  communication 
or  of  marks  of  inference-  Whereas  it  has  been  said  that  colourlessness 
and  simplicity  (or  the  not  being  an  aggregate  of  component  parts)  are 
obstacles  to  the  perception  of  the  soul,  this  holds  true  in  the  case  of 
perception  by  external  senses,  for  of  this  the  possession  of  colour  and 
the  possession  of  more  than  one  substance  are  the  necessary  conditions. 
or  exciting  causes,  while  mental  perception  is  independent  of  these. 
It  may  be  objected  that  this  would  be  the  case  were  there  proof  of  the 
existence  of  the  Soul,  but  that  there  is  none.  Accordingly  it  has  been 
said,  "From  proof  in  particular  by  invariable  divergence,  as  is  the  case 
with  Sound."  As  in  the  Substances,  Earth,  etc.,  the  absence  of  Sound  ig 
invariable,  i.  e.,  uniform,  and  there  is  thereby  proof  of  a  particular 
Substance,  namely  Ether,  in  addition  to  the  eight  Substances,  as  the 
Substratum  of  Sound,  so  on  account  of  the  invariable  divergence  of  desire 
froui  Earth,  etc.,  the  substratum  of  desire  also  must  be  different  from  the 
eight  Substances.  Lest  it  be  argued  that  all  this  goes  to  show  only 
that  the  Soul  is  a  subject  of  inference,  not  an  object  of  perception, 
the  words  "  by  the  innate  as  well  as  the  sensible  cognition  in  the 
form  of  'P  are  employed.  By  the  word  'iti'  the  form  of  the  cognition  is. 
indicated.  Therefore  the  cognition,  in  the  form  of  'I/  which  is  pro 
duced,  without  the  help  of  verbal  communication  and  mark  of  inference, 
in  one  whose  eyes  are  closed,  should  be  explained  by  the  innate  idea, 
of  Egoity  or  I-ness  and  its  sensible  or  perceptible  attributes,  and  not 
by  reference  to  the  body,  and  the  like,  since  the  divergence  or  absence 
of  desire  is  invariable  there.  After  "by  the  innate  as  well  as  the  sensible 
cognition"  the  words  "Should  be  established"  are  to  be  supplied. 
There  are  many  proofs  of  the  existence  of  the  Soul.  They  are  omitted 
here  for  fear  of  increasing  the  volume  of  the  treatise.  They  should 
be  sought  in  the  Maytikha — 18. 

Vivfiti. — Vedantins,  however,  hold  that  the  soul  is  nothing  but 
eternal  knowledge  (vijnana)  according  to  the  Sruti,  SlfsfawN'S^S^ *J f ?H I 
^Tr*i  JTsT*H'??f  sHF,  "Lo  !  the  Soul,  imperishable,  is  truth,  knowledge,, 
infinite,  and  all-pervading,"  (Brihaddrnyaka  Upanisad  IV.  v.  14). 
Although,  in  reality,  it  is  one,  yet,  owing  to  the  diversity  of  its  Upddhi 
or  adjuncts  in  the  form  of  the  inner  sense,  which  are  products  of  Mdydr 
i.e.,  limitation,  it  appears  as  manifold.  That  it  is  so,  follows  from  such 

Srutis  as  yt>*HlRdlM*t  "One  only,  without  a  second,"  Chhdndogya 
Upanisad,  VI.  ii.  I),  q^^sTI  ^4^?TTrd<lr*4|  ^T  5*f  nRlfrMHffi  "^o  tne  one" 
inner  Self  of  all  beings,  for  every  form,  became  its  counterform"" 
(Katha  Upanisad,  II.  v.  9.) 

He  discredits  this  view. 

The  words,  i  object  of  perception  '  are  the  complement  of  '  aham 
Hi/  '  I  ' — this.  Thus,  the  object  of  such  popular  mental  perceptions 
as  '  I  feel  pleasure/  etc.,  is  not  '  agamika/  i.  e.,  identical  with  tsvara^ 
the  probandum,  of  such  l  agama  '  or  text  of  the  Veda  as  "  truth,  know 
ledge,  infinite,  and  all-pervading,"  (Taittiriya  Upanisad,  II.  i.  1).  He 
states  the  reason  of  this  by  g^pftn^vqf  etc.  ftfofe^:  because  difference 
from  Isvara  is  established  by  pleasure  and  pain,  which,  though  primary 


KANADA  StiTRAS  III,  2,  12.  129 

or  instinctive  or  original  or  innate,  are  yet  sensible.  The  instinctive- 
ness  of  pleasure  lies  in  agreeables  or  desirables,  since  it  is  there  the 
object  of  desire  which  is  not  dependent  upon  any  other  desire  ;  whereas 
the  instinctiveness  of  pain  lies  in  disagreeable,  since  it  is  there  the 
objeet  of  aversion  which  is  not  dependent  upon  any  other  aversion. 
Sensibleness,  again,  is  the  being  the  object  of  perception  (i.  e.  by  the 
inner  sense).  This  is  mentioned  for  the  purpose  of  removing  the 
(possible)  apprehension  that  the  mark  is  an  unproved  or  unknown 
mark,  and  also  to  prevent  overeaten  sion,  in  the  case  where  eternal 
bliss  is  attributed  to  Isvara,  because  eternal  bliss  can  never  be  an 
object  of  perception.  Pleasure  and  pain,  therefore,  being  products, 
are  proof  of  the  difference  between  the  Jiva  and  fsvara.  This  argu 
ment  is  illustrative  :  it  should  be  observed  that  knowledge,  volition, 
desire,  and  also  aversion,  as  products,  establish  difference  from  Isvara. 

It  may  be  urged  that  in  such  inferences  as,  u  The  soul  which  is  the 
object  of  the  perception,  '  I  am/  is  different  from  Isvara,  because  it 
possesses  pleasure  which  is  a  product,"  there  being  no  example,  and 
consequently  no  observation  of  congruity  of  similar  instances,  know 
ledge  of  the  universal  relation  is  impossible.  For  this  reason,  it  has 
been  said  wjfaVflJWfftraTT^  i-  e.,  from  the  uniformity  of  difference.  The 
use  of  the  ablative  inflexion  has  the  object  of  denoting  the  (necessary) 
condition  leading  to  the  inference,  and  the  syntactical  connection  of 
the  word  is  with  the  word  f^fa%3[:  The  import,  therefore,  is,  that, 
even  though  there  is  no  example  by  way  of  agreement,  yet,  Isvara 
being  an  example  by  way  of  difference,  an  inference  with  respect  to 
the  matter  in  hand  is  possible,  through  the  observation  of  the  universal 
relation  of  difference,  dependent  upon  the  concomitance  or  congruity 
of  difference. 

It  may  be  urged,  again,  that  that  a  mark  can  establish  difference 
from  Isvara,  by  the  universal  relation  of  difference,  has  not  been 
known  before.  To  remove  this  apprehension,  it  has  been  stated  JT»^c£ 
i.  e.,  like  Sound,  etc.  The  meaning  is  this  :  As  the  difference  of  Ether 
from  Isvara  is  proved  by  the  mark,  namely  Sound,  which  is  known  by 
the  method  of  the  universal  relation,  or  uniformity,  of  difference,  so 
the  difference  of  the  soul  from  tsvara  is  proved  by  the  possession  of 
pleasure,  etc.,  which  are  products. 

Bhdgya:  —  In  III.  ii.  6  —  17,  the  author  gives,  in  the  form  of  a 
dialogue,  contrary  arguments  as  to  whether  the  Self  be  an  object  of 
perception  only,  or  of  inference  only,  or  of  both,  and  gives  his  own 
conclusion  in  III.  ii.  18. 

Unity  of  Soul,  as  an  objection. 

Upaskdra.—-  Having  thus  finished  the  section  on  the  investigation  of  the  Soul,  he  now 
begins  the  section  on  the  plurality  of  Souls.  Therein  the  following  aphorism  s«ti  forth  an 
adverse  doctrine. 


I  \  (  *  \ 

%  Sukha-du^kha-jnana-nispatti-avilesat,  because 
there  is  no  difference  in  the  production  of  pleasure,  painj  and  know 
ledge.  f  TRWf  Aikatmyam,  identity  or  unity  of  Soul. 


130  VAlSESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

19.     Soul  is   one,    since  there  is  no  difference  in   the    produc 
tion  of  pleasure,  pain,  and  knowledge.  —  154. 

There  is  only  one  S:>ul,  in  spite  of  the  difference  of  the  bodies  of 
Chaitra,  Maitra,  and  others.  Why  ?  Because  of  the  non-distinction  in  the 
prodiiction  of  pleasure,  nain,  and  knowledge,  i.  e.,  because  the  origin  of 
pleasure,  pain,  and  knowledge  is  really  undifferentiated  in  this  that  it 
is  determined  by,  or  confined  to,  the  body  as  a  whole.  If  there  were 
another  mark  to  prove  the  difference  of  the  Soul,  the  difference  of  the 
Soul  might  be  proved,  but  there  is  no  such  mark.  As  Ether  is  only  one, 
in  spite  of  the  production  of  Sounds  within  the  limits  of  particular 
•paces,  since  there  is  no  distinction  in  Sound  which  is  its  mark  ;  as 
Time  is  only  one,  since  there  is  no  distinction  in  the  intuition  of  simul 
taneity,  etc.,  which  is  its  mark  ;  »s  Space  is  only  one,  since  there  is  no 
distinction  in  the  intuition  of  East,  West,  etc.,  which  is  its  mark  ;  (so 
the  Soul  is  only  one).  —  19. 

Vivirti.  —  It  may  be  urged  that  the  identity  of  Jiva  and  Isvara  must 
be  admitted,  on  the  strength  of  the  texts  of  the  Veda,  "  One  only,  with 
out  a  second.  dH*4fa  ^H%d1,  "  Thou,  0  !§vetaketu,  art  that,"  (Chhan- 
dogya  Upanisad  VI.  viii.  7),  etc.  It  cannot  be  held  that  difference  is 
proved  by  the  aforesaid  inference  ;  because,  pleasure,  pain,  etc.  ,  being 
properties  of  the  internal  organ,  are  unproved  by  themselves  (t.  e.,  have 
no  independent  existence).  Thus  says  the  Brihadaranyaka  Upanisnd,  I. 
V.  3-,  TW'  tf^ftfrf%for?ST3r3CTS9T3CT  ^rdcT^fcfWfb^  H^  *nr^,  "Desire,  Inten 
tion,  Doubt,  Faith,  Unfaith,  Patience,  Impatience,  Modesty,  Intelli 
gence,  Awe,  —  all  this  is  verily  Mind  "  Here  the  word  Desire  denotes 
pleasure,  and  the  word  Intelligence  denotes  knowledge  in  the  from  of  a 
faculty.  Moreover,  pain,  algo,  appearing,  as  it  does,  in  co-existence 
with  pleasure,  cannot  be  an  attribute  of  the  Soul. 

This  he  apprehends  : 

The  meaning  is  that,  Tlft'Stalc^  ».  e.,  becasue  the  difference  of  the 
Jivatma  (embodied  Soul)  from  fsvara  is  not  proved,  fr«R*TT,  ».  «.,  by  the 
certainty  or  ascertainment,  g^r^TT'TFTf  ,  i.  e.,  of  pleasure,  pain,  and 
knowledge  ;  in  other  words,  they,  being  proved  in  the  mind  by  the 
above  Sruti  or  Vedic  text,  are  thereby  disproved  in  the  Soul. 

It*  diversity  explained. 
Upatkdra.  —  H«  itatoi  the  solution  or  conclusion  : 


5fWT  M  I  R  I  Ro  || 


:  Vyavasthatah,  from  status.  ^TTfl  Nan  a,  many. 
20.     Plurality  of  Souls  is  proved  by  status.  —  155. 

Souls  are  many.  Why  ?  Because  of  status.  Status  means  several 
conditions,  at  one  is  rich,  another  miserable,  one  is  happy,  another  un 
happy,  one  it  of  high,  another  of  low,  birth,  one  is  learned,  another 
ignorant.  These  circumstances  being  impossible  without  a  diversity  of 
Souls,  prove  a  diversity  of  Souls.  It  cannot  be  maintained  that  as  the 
states  of  one  and  the  same  Soul  is  diversified  by  the  difference  of  birth 


KANADA  SftTRAS  III,  2,  21.  131 

or  by  the  difference  of  childhood,  youth  and  old  age,  so  also  it  will  be 
in  the  case  of  the  difference  of  the  bodies  of  Chaitra,  Maitra,  and 
others,  for  it  is  possible  to  impose  contradictory  attributes  (on  one  and 
the  same  subject)  by  means  of  change  of  Time  (i.  e.}  at  different 
times).—  20. 


Vivriti.  —  He  removes  the  apprehension.  STTTT  means  non-identity  of 
the  Souls,  in  other  words,  that  the  Jivatma  is  not  identical  withfivara. 
Whence  ?  •5T3^TT?T:,  because  of  the  certainty  of  the  existence  of  pleasure, 
pain,  and  knowledge,  in  the  Soul.  For  pleasure,  etc.,  are  not  proper 
ties  of  the  mind,  because  the  mind  not  having  largeness  or  large  size, 
pleasure  etc.,  Would  be  imperceptible;  and  minuteness  or  atom-ness  or 
subtleness  must  be  affirmed  of  the  mind  as  determining  the  non-simul 
taneity  of  acts  of  knowing.  The  5ruti,  "  Desire,  Resolution,  etc.," 
however,  like  "Life  is  clarified  butter/'  etc.,  demonstrates  that  the  mind 
is  the  cause  of  desire,  etc.,  but  not  that  it  is  their  receptacle,  nor  that 
it  is  identical  with  them. 

Its  diversity  explained  —  continued. 
I7paskdra.-—Ho  gives  another  proof  : 

l  M  I  R  I  **  II 


^astra-samarthyat,  from  the  authority  (or  force  or  signi 
ficance)  of  the  Sdstras.   •g   Cha,  and. 

21.     (Plurality  f  of   Souls   follows)  also    from  the  authority  or 
significance  of  the  Sdstras,  —  156. 

'  ^astram'  means  Yeda  or  revelation.  Because  difference  of  Soul  is 
proved  by  it  also.  For  it  is  heard.  "  Two  Brahmans  (i.e.,  Souls)  have 
to  be  known,"  etc.;  and  also  "Two  birds,  friends  and  kindred,  embrace 
the  same  tree,  etc."  (Mundaka  Upanisad  III,  i.  I.)  —  21. 

Here  ends  the  second  chapter  of  the  third  book  in  the  Commentary 
of  !§ri  !§ankara  on  the  Aphorisms  of  Kanada. 


It  cannot  be  asked.  "What  then  will  be  the  fate  of  these 
texts  ,  viz.,  "  Thou  art  that,  O  &vetaketu  !  "  "  One  who  knows  Brahman, 
verily  becomes  Brahman,"  etc.  ?  For  the  text,  "  Thou  art  That,"  conveys 
the  sense  of  identity  in  this  sense  that  what  is  devoted  to,  or,  belongs  to 
That,  is  not  different  from  That.  The  text,  "One  who  knows  Brahman* 
verily  becomes  Brahman,  ll  does  not  convey  the  sense  of  identity,  but  thatr 
of  similary  of  the  Jiva  (t.  e.,  the  embodied  Soul),  to  Isvara  (i.e.,  the  Great 
Soul),  in  point  of  freedom  from  suffering  etc.  ;  for,  otherwise,  the  text. 
'The  stainless  one  attains  to  supreme  similarity,"  can  have  no  meaning. 
In  popular  language  also  there  is  the  topical  use  of  identity  in  the 
sense  of  resemblance,  as  when  there  is  an  abundance  of  wealth,  it  is  said, 
"this  priest  has  become  a  king,"  and  so  on.  Nor  should  it  be  ma 
intained  that  identity  is  produced  in  the  state  of  salvation,  on  the 
cessation  of  ignorance  or  false  knowledge,  since  difference,  being 
eternal,  is  incapable  of  destruction,  and  even  if  we  admit  the  destruc 
tion  of  difference,  then  since  there  is  necessity  for  the  existence  of  two 
individuals.  So  much  in  brief. 


132  VAlSESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


Bhasya '.—Interpret*  III.  ii.  19,  20,  and  21  in  the  monistic  sens* 
namely,  that  there  exists  only  one  Self,  variously  differentiated  on  the 
phenomenal  plane,  as  witnessed  by  such  texts  as  "  One  only,  with- 
out  a  second,"  "  One  ihitiing  Being  is  immanent  in  all  created  things," 
<  All  Selves  become  one,"  "All  Selves  emanate  from  this,  Same  Self" 
Two  birds,"  etc. 


— :*  : — 


KANiDA   StTTRAS  IV,  1,  1.  133 

BOOK  FOURTH— CHAPTER  FIRST. 

The  eternal  defined.       * 

Upaskdra.— Having  finished  the  enumeration,  definition,  and  examination  of  th«  nina 
'Substances,  Earth,  etc.,  and  desiring  to  refute  the  dootrine,  held  by  the  Samkhya  philoso 
phers,  that  prakriti  or  Matter  is  the  prime  cause,  and  to  establish  that  ultimate  atoms  are 
the  prime  cause  and  enter  into  the  composition  of  earth,  etc.,  the  author  first  of  all  gives  the 
definition  of  the  Genus,  eternality. 

u  *  i  n  m 

^  Sat,  existent  ^WTCJpTc^  Akaranavat  not  having  a  cause,  uncaused, 

causa  suifaff  Nityam,  eternal. 

1.     The  eternal  is  that  which  is  existent  and   uncaused. — 157. 

'Akaranavat,'  means  not  having  a  precedent  cause,  on  the  maxim  of 
the  purity  of  words  (which  excludes  other  interpretations  of  the  term). 
Hereby  the  water-pot,  and  the  like  are  excluded.  Still  the  definition 
may  be  too  wide  by  including  previous  non-existence  ;  so  he  says, 
4  existent'  i.  e.,  having  connection  with  existence.  In  the  case  of  the 
Predicables,  Combination  and  Species,  connection  with  existence  is 
nothing  but  combination  or  inherence  in  one  and  the  same  object  with 
existence.  In  the  case  of  any  other  Genus  and  of  existence  connec 
tion  with  existence  consists  only  in  being  the  object  of  the  cognition 
that  it  exists.  This  cognition  ia  not  in  respect  of  a  thing  as  such. 
"  Let.it  be  so;  "  it  cannot  be  objected,  "  in  other  cases  also.  What  is 
the  use  of  existence  ?  "  For,  existence  has  already  been  proved  as  the 
cause  of  assimilative  understanding. — 1. 

Vivriti. — Seme  hold  that  the  existent  is  produced  from  the  non 
existent.  What  they  have  in  view  is  this.  Seeds,  etc.,  are  not  productive- 
of  effects  such  as  shoots,  etc.  Were  this  the  case,  then  seeds,  etc.,  lying 
in  a  granary,  would  also  produce  shoots,  etc.  But  since  shoots  appear 
only  after  the  destruction  of  seeds  sown  on  a  field,  by  the  disjunction  of 
their  parts,  it  follows  that  it  is  the  destruction  of  seeds,  etc.,  which  is 
the  cause  of  shoots,  etc.,  So  we  have  the  stttram  of  Gautama,  stating 
the  argument  of  an  opponent,  "  Production  of  exietence  (is)  from 
non-existence,  as  there  is  no  appearance  without  destroying."  (Nyaya- 
Sutram,  IV.  i.  14). 

Only  to  refute  this  view,  he  strengthens  the  theory  of  progressive 
origination  by  the  series  of  ultimate  atoms,  etc. 

'  Sat/  means  something  in  the  form  of  existence  ;  '  akaranavat  '" 
means  a  non-product  ;  '  nityam  '  means  an  entity  which  opposes  an 
nihilation.  The  meaning  is  :  the  primary  cause  of  compound  bodies  is 
not  non-existent,  that  is  to  say,  because,  if  causality  of  destruction  were 
admitted,  then  it  would  entail  the  production  of  shoots  even  from  pow 
dered  seeds. 

Mark  of  existence  of  ultimate  atoms, 

Vpaskdra.— After  describing  the  Genus,  sternal,  he  now    says  with  reference  to    ultimata 
atoms  : 


134  VAI£ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


*  n  i  *  n 

Tasya,  its.     Of    the  ultimate  atom.    «pp^    Karyyam,    effect, 
Lingam,  mark. 

2.     The  effect  is  the  mark  (of  the  existence)  of  the   ultimate 
atom.  —  2. 

1  Tasya/  i.    e.  of    the   ultimate    atom  ;  karyyam,'  e.  g.,  the  water-pot 
and  the  like  ;  '  lingam.'     Accordingly  the  stitram  of  Gautama.     "  From 
the  evolved  is    the  production    of  the    evolved,    on    the    evidence  of  (ex 
perience  by)    perception,"    (Nyaya-sutram    IV.  i.    II).     Now    the    inter 
relation  of  parts  and    wholes  is    perceived.     If  it    were  unlimited,    there 
would  be  no  difference  in  size  of    measurement  between  mount  Meru  and 
a  grain  of  mustard  seed  ;  for,  they    wauld  be    without    distinction,  both 
being  orginated  by  infinite  parts.     Nor  can  it    be    said    that    difference 
will  be  caused  by  the    differences  of   the  size  of    each    part,  and  of    the 
aggregation  of  parts  ;  for,  without  a  difference  of  number,  these  also  would 
be  impossible.     If  it  be  said  that  pralaya   or  destruction  of  the  creation 
may  be  the  limit  (of  the  series  of  parts  and  wholes)  ;  (we  reply  that)  the 
final  something  ex-hypothesi)  having  no    parts,   pralaya    itself    would  be 
impossible,  for  it  is  only  disjunction  and  destruction  of  parts  which  can 
destroy    substances.  Nor  is  disjunction  the  limit,  for  it  is  impossible  for 
it  to  have  only  one  substratum.  Therefore,  a  substance    without  parts,, 
must  be  the  limit,  and  this  the  ultimate  atom.    A  mote  is   not  the  limit  ; 
for,  being  a  visible  substance,  it  possesses  magnitude,  and  is  composed' 
of  more  substance  than  one  ;  magnitude,  as  the  cause  of  visual  percep 
tion,    presupposes,    or    is    dependent    upon,    multiplicity  of  substance  ; 
else  there  would  be  no  magnitude  even,  what  then  would  be  the  cause  ? 
Nor    are    the  constituent  parts    of    the    mote    atoms,  for  we  must  infer 
that  they  also,    as  originatfve   of    a    substance    possessing    magnitude,. 
are    compossed  of  parts,    like  thread,    and    like   potsherd.     Therefore. 
whatever    substance  is  an    effect,    is  composed  of  parts,  and    whatever 
substance  is  composed   of  parts,  is  an  effect.     So    that    from    whichever 
part  the    nature  of  being   an    effect    goes    away,  from  it  goes  away  also 
the  nature  of  being  made  up  of  parts.  This  is  the  proof  of  the  existence 
of    indivisible   ultimate      atoms.     So    it    has    been    said   by     Professor 
Prasastadeva,  "  Earth  is  twofold,  eternal  and  non-eternal.  —  2- 

Law  of  Causation. 

Upaskdra  —  Now  he  states  an  argument  or  proof,  to  prove  that  there   are   colour,    etc.,  ia 
the  ultimate  atom  : 


:  II  3  I?  I  ^  II 

Karana-bhavat,   from    existence    in    the    cause. 
Karyyabhava.i,  existence  in  the  effect 

3.     The  existence  (of  colour,  etc.)  in  the  effect,  (follows)  from, 
(their)  existence  in  the  cause.—  159. 

The  existence  of  colour,  etc.,  in  the  effect,  is  due  to  their  existence 
in  the  cause.     For  the  attributes  of  the  effect  result   from  the  attributes 


KANlDA  SftTRAS  IV,  1,  4.  135 

of  the  cause,  the    same  being   observed    in    the    case    of   the   water-pot, 
canvas,  etc.    This  is  the  meaning. — 3. 

VivTiti. — He  points  out  an  objeotion  to  the  primary  causality  of 
nonexistence. 

'Bhavah/  i.  e.,  the  existence,  of  the  '  effect/  i.  e.,  compound  bodies, 
follows  from  the  existence  of  the  '  cause,'  i.  e.,  the  primary  cause  (viz., 
ultimate  atoms).  Otherwise,  like  the  quality  of  being  clayey,  of  that 
which  is  made  of  clay,  it  would  follow  that  effects,  i.  er  compound  bodies 
would  be  non-existent,  because  they  are  constituted  by  what  ia  non 
existent. 

The  eternal  exists. 

Upaskdra. — With  a  view  to  silenoa  the  advooate  of  the  doctrine  of   the  itransieney  of  all 
things,  he  now  saj's  : 

:  H  a  i  *  i  *  11 

Anityah,  non-eternal,  ffif  Iti,  such,  t.  e.,  such  intuition  and 
expression  .f^RfaW:  ViSesatah,  of  the  particular,  i.e.,  the  eternal.  srf^Nnrra1* 
Partisedha-bhavah,  the  form  of  negation. 

4.  "Not-eternal" — such  (intuition  and  expression)  can  be 
accounted  for  only  as  the  negation  of  the  eternal.— 160. 

In  '  visesatah  '  the  affix  '  tasi'  is  used  in  the  genitive  sense.  There 
would  be  negation  of  '  visesa'  i.  e.,  the  eternal,  if  there  were  not  such 
intuition,  and  application  of  the  word  as  '  non-eternal,'  because  the 
prefix  nan  (non)  has  the  force  of  negating  the  meaning  of  the  word 
next  to  it.  Therefore  how  can  there  be  the  intuition  and  expression, 
4  non-eternal/  in  the  absence  (of  that)  of  the  eternal  ?  Hence  it  is 
proved  that  the  eternal  exists.  Or,  (the  meaning  of  the  S&tram  may 
be),  the  negation  of  the  eternal  must  be  made  by  you  in  this  way  that 
(it  is)  "  not  eternal,"  i.  e.,  that  the  ultimate  atom  is  not  eternal.  But 
negation  in  this  way  is  not  successful,  since  it  is  frustrated  by  proof 
and  disproof.  (In  this  interpretation),  the  siltram  should  be  rendered 
thus  :  The  word  ?f  (not)  will  be  a  negative  term  by  itself,  as  the  rule, 
•"SJ,  TT,  'ft,  and  ^n  are  negative  terms."  Thus  "  non-eternal  "  will  mean 
not  eternal.  'Pratisedha-bhavah,  means  the  nature  or  form  of  negative. 
Hence  "  not  eternal" — this  is  the  form  of  the  negation  of  visesa/  •  i.e.y 
the  eternal,  and  it(is  not  possible.  This  closes  the  argument. — 4. 

Vivriti. — He  refutes  the  view  that  all  is  non-eternal,  that  there  is 
nothing  which  is  eternal. 

3tf  (in  the  aphorism)  is  an  indeclinable,  having  the  same  meaning  as 
5T*T  (non).  Thus,  '  not  eternal' — such  negation  is  i  visesotah/  i.  e.,  with 
reference  to  particular  things.  So  that,  there  may  be  the  negation  that 
compound  bodies  are  not  eternal,  but  such  whole-sale  negation  as  every 
thing  is  not  eternal,  is  not  possible,  because  the  eternal,  which  is  the 
counter-opposite,  is  frustrated  by  proof  and  disproof.  This  is  the  whole 
meaning. 


136  VAI&ESIKA   PHILOSOPHY. 

The  theory  that  atoms  are  not  eternal,  is  erroneous. 

Upatldra,  —  It  may  be  objected  as  follows  :  The  ultimate  atom  is  not  eternal,  since  it  is 
corporal  of  ponderable,  like  a  watei-pot.  Similarly,  the  possession  of  colour,  the  possession  of 
taste,  etc.,  may  be,  one  by  one,  adduced  as  so  many  reasons.  So  also  by  simultaneous  conjunc 
tion  with  six  (other  ultimate  atoms),  an  ultimate  atom  has  six  parts  ;  so  that  from  its  posses 
sion  of  parts,  and  from  its  being  the  substratum  of  the  conjunction  appearing  in  objects  which 
it  cannot  pervade,  (we  may  infer  that  the  ultimate  atom  is  not  eternal).  Moreover,  if  there 
be  Ether  within  an  ultimate  atom,  then  being  porous,  it  must  have  parts  ;  if  there  be  no  Eth«r 
inside  it,  then  it  would  follow  that  Ether  does  not  penetrate  every  where.  Further,  (the 
ultimate  atom  is  not  eternal),  because  it  casts  shadow,  and  possesses  circulation.  Again,  the 
inon-eternality  of  the  ultimate  atom  follows  also  from  the  inference  whi  oh  establishes  transi 
ency,  e.  g.,  the  inference,  that  all  that  exists  is  momentary.  If  then  there  be  such  a  series  of 
inferences,  how  can  it  be  maintained  that  the  ultimate  atom  is  eternal  ? 

To  meet  these  objections,  he  says  : 


n  $  i  n  *  n 

Avidya,  ignorance,  error. 

5.  (It  is)  an  error  (to  suppose  that  the  ultimate  atom  is  not 
eternal).  —  161. 

Every  inference,  which  has  for  its  subject  the  non-eternality  of  the 
ultimate  atom,  is  ignorance,  i.e.,  is  of  the  form  of  error,  since  it  springs 
from  a  fallacy,  This  fallacy  is  occasionally  obstruction  or  opposition  to 
the  proof  which  comprehends  the  subject  ;  always  absence  of  the 
characteristic  of  being  pervaded  (or  being  the  mark),  due  to  want  of 
evidence  preventive  of  its  existence  in  the  vipaksa  (i.  e.,  in  which  the 
non-existence  of  that  which  has  to  be  proved,  is  sertain)  ;  sometimes 
unproof  by  itself  ;  and  others  which  should  be  learnt  from  the  kindred. 
system  (i.e-,  the  Nyaya-Sutram  of  Gautamaj.  —  5. 

Bhdsya.  —  Reads  IV.  i.  3.4,  and  5  as  two  aphorisms  only,  viz.,  Icdrana- 
bhdvdt  kdryabhdvo,  nilya  iti',  and  Visesatah  pratisedhabhdvo  lvidyd',  and 
interprets  them  to  mean,  respectively,  "The  nature  of  the  effect, 
(though)  following  from  the  nature  of  the  cause  (which  is  eternal)  is 
non-eternal"  and  "  It  is  an  error  to  suppose  that  because  things  (e.g.r 
atoms)  exist  as  effects  (e.gr.,  compound  bodies),  therefore  they  cannot 
exist  in  the  causal  (or  atomic)  state",  —  in  order  to  explain  the  applica 
tion  of  the  word  "non-eternal''  in,  I.  i.  8  where  the  reference  is  to  things 
which  are  products. 

Requisites  of  perception. 

Upaskdra.  —  It  may  he  objected,  "  Well,  if  the  ultimate  atom  exi«ts,  why  is  it  not  per 
ceived  by  the  senses  ?  It  is  you  who  have  proved  that  the  possession  of  colour,  the  possession 
of  touch,  etc.,  are  exciting  causes  of  sensibility."  Hence  he  says  : 


II  tf  I  ?  I  $  II 


Mahati,  in  respect  of  an  object  possessing  magnitude. 
Aneka-dravya-vattvat,  by  means  of  its  possession  of  what  is  composed  of 
more  than  one  substance.  ^TTrT  Rupat,  by  means  of  colour.  ^  Cha,  and. 
YTftf^:  Upalabdhih,  perception. 

6.  External  perception  (takes  place),  in  respect  of  an  object 
possessing  magnitude,  by  means  of  its  possession  of  that  which 
is  composed  of  more  substances  than  one,  and  by  means  of  its. 
colour.  —  162.n 


KANAUA  SfiTRAS  IV,  1,  7.  137 

'  M.aliati  '  means  in  respect  of  a  substance  possessing  magnitude 
the  affix,  ,  matup,  denoting  possession,  among  affixes  denoting  quality' 
being  elided  after  the  word,  mahat,  denoting  measure.  l  Anekadravyat- 
*-at'  mtans  from  the  nature  or  state  of  containing  that  of  which  more 
substances  than  one  are  the  substrata.  This  being  so,  Air  also  would 
be  perceptible.  Hence  he  says,  "  And  by  mean?  of  Colour/'  i.  e.  as 
will  be  later  on  said,  developed  and  un  eclipsed  or  un  obscured  colo'ur. 
'  Uj  alabdhih  "  is  complemented  by  the  words,  "by  the  external  sense/' 
"Therefore  it  goes  without  saying  that  there  is  no  external  perception  of 
the  ultimate  atom,  since  it  does  not  possess  magnitude.  "  The  possession 
of  that  which  is  composed  of  more  than  one  substance  "  means  either 
the  being  constituted  by  a  compound  of  more  than  one  substance,  or 
the  being  the  substratum  of  the  magnitude  which  is  due  to  a  multiplici 
ty  of  component  parts. 

It  cannot  be  said  that  the  possession  of  that  which  is  a  compound 
of  more  than  ore  substance,  is  rendered  futile  (as  a  condition  precedent 
of  i  erception),  by  the  very  possession  of  magnitude  ;  since  the  reverse 
is  also  i  cssible.  Nor  can  it  be  said,  "Futility  of  the  producer  is  caus 
ed  by  the  producible,,  but  not  that  of  the  producible  by  the  producer  •" 
for  the  agreement  and  the  difference  of  the  producible  and  the  producer 
being  simultaneously  apprehended,  there  is  no  futility,  since  otherwise 
it  would  follow  that  the  futility  of  the  staff,  etc.,  will  be  caused  by  the 
whirling  of  it,  etc.  Nor  can  it  be  said  that  there  is  a  development  of  or 
rise  in,  perceptibility  at  a  distance  due  to  development  of,  or  rise  'in 
magnitude;  for  a  development  of,  or  rise  in,  the  possession  of  a 
compound  of  more  substances  than  one  being  also  possible,  there  can  be 
no  discrimination.  Moreover,  while  a  spider's  web  measuring  four 
cubits,  etc.,  is  not  perceptible  frcm  a  distance,  the  perceptibility  of  the 
spider  itself  is  certainly  due  to  a  development  of  the  possession  of  a 
compound  of  more  substances  than  one,  since  a  preponderance  of 
magnitude  exists  in  the  web.  So  also  it  should  be  observed  that  while 
^  a  piece  of  cloth,  constituted  by  five  yarns,  is  not  perceptible  at  a  dis- 
jtance,  is  in  spite  of  a  preponderance  of  magnitude  in  it,  a  club  of  a  very 
small  magnitude  is  perceptible  there  __  6. 

Cause  of  non-perception 

I'j.atMra.-  Such  being  the  case,  there  should,  it  might  bo  urged,  also  be  perception  of 
tl  e  light  of  a  t-  hooting  star  at  midday,  of  the  light  of  the  eye,  or  of  Air,  as  well  as  of  magnitude 
which  ecu  bintb  -with  colour  by  means  of  its  combination  with  Touch.  Hence  ho  says: 


H  a  i  ?  i  vs  ii 


i,  there  being.  ^^  Api,  even,  in  spite  of.  %sqf3(  Dravyatve, 
substance-ness,  *T5<%  Mahatve,  magnitude.  ^T  Rupa,  colour.  *f^K  Saras- 
kara,  impression,  evolution,  reformation.  .SPTT^  Abhavat,  on  account 
of  the  absence  or  non-existence  of.  efPTt:  Vayoh,  of  Air.  Sljjq^fa:  Anupal- 
abdhih,  non-perception. 


138  VAlSESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

7.     The  non-perception  of  Air,  in  spite    of    there   being   subs 
tance-ness  and  magnitude,  is  due  to  the  non-existence  of  the  evolu 

tion  of  colour.—  163. 

• 

By  the  term  "  evolution  of  colour  "  are  intended  combination  or 
inhesion  of  colour,  the  development  of  colour  to  the  degree  of  appre 
ciability,  and  the  no.i-obscuration  of  colour.  Though,  therefore,  i.i 
the  case  of  Air,  the  selfsame  combination  of  touch  is  alse  the  combina 
tion  of  colour,  yet  it  is  not  qualified  or  determined  by  colour,  for 
there  is  in  it  absolute  non-existence  of  colour.  In  the  light  of  the  eye, 
there  is  no^evolution,  that  is,  appreciability,  of  colour.  In  the  light  of  the 
shooting  star  at  midday,  there  is  no  ev<»lnv.on,  that  is,  non-obscuration, 
of  colour.  Of  these,  therefore,  there  is  uo  perceptibility.  In  like  man 
ner,  evolution  of  colour  is  to  be  analogously  applied  to  the  heat  of  the 
summer,  the  fire  in  a  frying  pan,  gold,  etc. 


The  writer  of  the  VTitti  has,  however,  said  that  ^T^f^rR  is  a  com 
pound  of  the  words  ^T  and  ^TCTC^TC,  formed  by  tho  elision  of  one  of 
the  tvvc  ^T's,  and  that,  therefore,  the  non-perception  of  Air  is  in  conse 
quence  of  the  non-existence  of  colour  in  it,  while  the  non-perception 
of  the  ocular  light,  etc.,  is  due  to  the  non-existence  of  the  evolution 
of  col  oar  —  7- 

Requisites  of  perception  of  colour. 

Upnskdra.  —  -In  this  way  having,  itum3diatJly  after  t'ae  section  on  the  eterpality  of  the 
ultimate  ato:us,  finished  the  section  on  fie  perospfcibility  of  external  objects,  as  a  subsi 
diary  topic,  by  their  being  the  inferential  marks  of  the  ultimate  atoms,  and  intending  to 
sot  forth,  by  introducing  an  example,  the  section  on  the  perceptibility  of  Attributes  °  he 
says  : 


II  8  I  ?  I  e;  II 

Aneka,  more  than  one.  %zq  Dravya,  substance.  ^nftr^T^  Samava- 
yat,  from  combination  in.  ?5*r  Rupa,  colour.  fa^ftTci;  Visesat,  from  some 
special  characteristic  of.  5^q[  Rupa,  colour.  ST^fsvr:  Upalavdhih, 
perception. 

8.  Perception  of  colour  (arises)  from  its  combination  with 
a  compound  of  substances  more  than  two,  and  from  (its  possession 
of)  some  special  characteristic  of  colour.  —  164. 

'  Rupaviiesa  '  means  the  species  or  peculiarity  inherent  in  colour, 
and  that  consists  of  the  characteristics  of  being  developed  to  the  degree 
of  appreciability,  of  being  unobscured,  and  of  being  colour.  From 
this,  perception  of  colour  takes  place.  Lest  it  might  be  said  that,  such 
being  the  case,  the  colour  of  the  ultimate  atom  as  well  as  of  the  dyad 
would  be  perceived,  so  it  has  been  added  —  '  anekadravya-samavayat.' 
The  word  '  aneka  '  denotes  multitude  ;  hence  l  anekadravya  '  means 
that  to  which  many  substances  belong  as  its  substratum,  e.  g.,  a 
molecule  of  the  atoms,  and  the  like.  To  term  'anekadravya-samavayat' 
therefore,  means  from  combination  with  such  a  compound  substance. 
The  water-pot,  etc.,  although  they  are  originated  by  two  parts,  (i-  e.y 
potsherds,  etc.),  really  contain  a  multitude  of  substances  as  their  subs 
tratum,  in  the  serial  arrangement  of  the  parts  of  these  parts,  and  so 


KANiDA  StiTRAS  IV.  1.  9.  139 


on  As  taste,  touch,  etc.,  lack  in  the  characteristic  of  colourness,  so 
there  is  no  ocular  perception  of  them.  In  the  case  of  ocular  fire  or 
light  non-visibility  is  due  to  the  absence  of  the  degree  of  appreci  abi 
lity.  '  Development  or  appreciability  is  only  a  particular  universal 
entity  or  l  class  '  belonging  to  the  particular  attributes  of  colour,  etc., 
and  is  pervaded  by,  or  included  in,  colourness,  etc. 

Objection  :  _  This  being  so,  no  relation  of  higher  and  lower  (classi 
fication)  will  be  at  all  established  even  by  whiteness,  fragrantness, 
sourness,  etc.  If,  however,  you  suppose  a  manifoldness  of  develop 
ment  or  appreciability,  pervaded  by,  or  included  in,  them  respectively, 
then  there  will  be  a  redundancy  of  supposition,  and  the  term  develop 
ment  or  appreciability,  33?5T  also  will  have  various  meanings. 

Answer  :  _  It  is  not  so  ;  for,  development  or  appreciability  denotes 
the  ur.ddhi  or  condition,  namely,  the  characteristic  of  the  attribute 
cay.able  of  being  apprehended  by  each  individual  external  sense, 
while  non-development  or  non-appreciability  denotes  only  the  absence 
of  the  upddhi  or  condition.  Some  say  that  appreciability  is  simply 
the  non-existence  of  non-appreciability.  This  should  be  considered, 
since  non-appreciability  also  cannot  be  similarly  established.  It  may  be 
said  that  non-appreciability  is  a  particular  attribute  beyond  the 
cognizance  of  the  senses.  If  it  be  so,  then  it  would  follow  that  appre 
ciability  is  a  particular  attribute  within  the  reach  of  the  senses.  If  it 
be  asked  "  What  is  the  determinant  of  sensuousness  ?,"  we  reply  that 
both  of  us,  (i.  e.,  the  disputants)  are  equally  at  a  disadvantage  here. 
They  also  say  that  appreciability  is  the  one  and  only  one  '  class  ' 
present  in  all  particular  attributes,  and  that  the  non-establishment  of 
the  relation  of  higher  and  lower  is  no  fault  in  the  case  of  the  class 
inhering  in  attributes.  —  8. 

Perception  of  Taste,  Smell,  and    Touch. 

Uvaskdra  —Of  the  attributes  other  than  Touch,  co-exsistsnce  in  the  same  substratum 
with  colour  is  "itself  the  nectary  condition  of  their  being  perceptible  by  the  external  senses. 
For  this  reason,  after  having  stated  the  conditions  of  perception  of  colour,  he  now  extends 
them  to  other  cases,  and  says  : 


i  s  i  ?  1  8.  ii 

^srTena,  by  this,.  ?3W«?J*I3  R'asa-gandha-sparsesu,  in  respect  of 
taste,  smell,  and  touch,  srtf  Jnanam,  knowledge.  sqriqra^  Vyakhyatam, 
explained. 

9.     Hereby    is   explained  (perceptual)  knowledge  in  the  case 
of  Taste,  Smell,  and  Touch.  —  165. 

1  Ten  a  '  means  by  the  preceptual  knowledge  of  colour.  As  precep- 
tion  of  colour  arises  from  some  special  characteristic  of  colour,m'z.,  colour- 
ness,  non-obscuration,  and  appreciability,  so  perception  of  taste  arises 
from  some  particularity  of  taste,  characterised  as  tasteness,  non-obscura 
tion,  and  appreciability.  This  should  be  applied  to  other  cases.  Com 
bination  with  a  compound  of  more  than  two  substances,  should  be  also- 
extended.  From  inappreciabilitj  to  the  organs  of  the  ear,  the  tongue, 


140  VAlSESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


and  the  skin,  result  non-apprehension  of  smell,  taste,  and  touch     Being 
undeveloped    or    inappreciable,    smell  and   taste  are  not  perceived  in  a 
stone,  etc.  ;  for  they  are  perceived  in  their  ashes.      Some  maintain    that 
they    are    perceived  indeed  in  the  stone,   etc.,    but  not  distinctly      The 
non-apprehension  of  the  colour  of  a  watery  substance,  the  parts  of  which 
have  been  disjoined  from  one  another,  is  due  to  non-developrae  it  of  the 
colour.     So  also  is  the  non-apprension  of    taste.     In   hot  water,  there  is 
non-approhension  of  the  colour  of  the  fire,  in    consequence    of    its    non- 
development,  and  of  touch,  in  consequence  of  its   obscuration.     In  com 
minuted  camphor,  the  champaka  flayer,  etc.,  non-apprehension  of  colour 
taste,    and    touch    is  due  to  thoir  non-djve1  -pment   or    inappreciabilit/ 
In  gold,  and  the  like,  colour  is    indeel    do /eloped,    but    whiteness    and 
lummousness    are    obscured.     Some    hold    that  colour  also  is  obscured 
whereas    the    apprehension  of  gold  takes  place  with  the    help    of    other 
colour.      Obscuration,    again,  is  non-apprehension  caused  by  the  appre 
hension  of    a    more  powerful    like    object,    and  not    merely    relation   or 
connection  with  a  powerful  like  object.      For,  since    connection    with    a 
powerful    like    object  has    to    be  ascertained  by    non-apprehension  it  is 
the    non-apprehension    which    is  of  primary    importance.     Whereas  the 
powerful    like    object    is    not  of    primary    importance,   as  the  necessary 
condition  of  non-apprehension  ;  because  neither    non-apprehension,  nor 
antecedent    non-existence    of    apprehension,    nor  its   absolute  non-exis- 
tenoe  is  subject  to  its  operation,  while  the   annihilation  of  apprehension 
does  not  exist  there.     If  it  be  objectei,  «   Then    your    proposition    also 
that    obscuration    is  non-apprehension  caused  by  the  apprehension  of  a 
more  powerful  like  object,  is  not  proved,"  we  reply,  «  Let  it  be  so-  Still 
apprehension  and  non-apprehension  alone  are  the   necessary  condition* 
of  the  strength  or  weakness  of  a  like  object,  or  of  the  existance    of  such 
a  relation  ;  and  the  same  is  the  meaning  of  the  word,  obscuration." 9. 

Gravity,  not  perceptible. 

Upaskdra.—lt  may  be  asked,  "  Since  Gravity  also  is  combined  with  a  compound  of  more 
than  two  substances  (».  e.'  atoms),  and  appears  in  the  sama  substratu  n  with  colour  and  ma-'ni- 
tude,  why  then  it  is  not  perceptible  ;  "  Henco  he  says  : 


<fl^  Tasya,  of  this,  i.  e.,  the  genus  of  colourness,  etc.,  and  develop 
ment  or  appreci ability.  sroRT^  Abhavat,  because  of  the  non-existence 
^rsqfr^rc:  Avyabhicharah,  non-deviation.  No  breach  of  uniformity  OP 
the  rule. 

10.     Because    of  the  non-existence    of   this,  there  is  no  viola 
tion    (of  the  above  law  of  perceptibility  in  the  case  of  Gravitv  }- 
166. 

Gravity  is  not  perceptible,  because  of  the  non-existence,  in  Gravity 
of  this,  Viz.,  the  genus  of  colourness,  etc.,  and  development  or  apprecia- 
bihty.  It  might  be  said  that  granted  that,  colourness,  etc.,  do  not  exist 
there,  yet  there  may  be  perception  of  Gravity.  To  prevent  this,  he  adds 
*  avyabhicharah.'  There  is  <  non-deviation  '  i.  e.,  unbroken  uniformity 
of  the  five  «  classes  '  or  universals,  e.  g.,  colourness,  etc.,  towards. 


KANlDA  SftTRAS  IV,  1,  11.  141 

apprehensibility  by  each  individual  sense.  Whenever  there  exists  one 
or  another  of  the  pentad  of  colourness,etc.,  there  also  exists  apprehensi 
bility  by  the  respective  external  senses,  as  shown  by  the  method  of 
difference  (that  where  the  former  are  not,  there  the  latter  does  not 
-exist).  This  is  the  meaning. 

Gravity,  by  reason  of  its  being  left  obscure  in  tha  sutram,  as  the 
topic  of  discussion,  by  Prasastadeva  classed  annng  things  supersen- 
suous,  is  by  Vallavacharya  said  to  be  perceived  by  touch.  —  10. 

Where  Numbers,  etc.,  are  objects  of  visual  perception. 

LTpaskdra.  —  Having  thus  st  ited  objects  pjrc3ptible  by  the   senses    individually,   he    now 
enumerates  objects  porceptible  by  two  senses  jointly  : 


<E'<?3T:  Saiiakhyah,  numbers.  TK^Tfiinfa  Parimanani,  magnitudes,  exten 
sions.  «£^«t>^  Prithaktvam,  separateness.  ^f4tJlf%*:ITin  Sanayoga-vibhagau, 
conjunction  and  disjunction.  Tlr^lTi^  Paratva-aparatve,  priority  and 
posteriority.  ^r*qc  Karmma,  action,  "qr  Cha,  and.  ^^sq^T^rT^T^  Rupi-dra- 
vya-samavayat,  through  combination  with  substances  possessing  colour. 
^T^rfifr  Ohaksusani,  visible,  objects  of  visual  perception. 

11.  Numbers,  Magnitudes,  Separateness,  Conjunction  and 
Disjunction,  Priority  and  Posteriority,  and  Action  become  objects 
of  visual  perception,  through  their  combination  with  Substances 
possessing  colour.  —  167. 

The  words  have  not  been  formed  into  a  compound  in  order  to  indi 
cate  their  mutual  independence  in  respect  of  their  visual  or  tactual 
perceptibility.  Although  there  is  dependence  upon  JTff3T,  i.  e.,  largeness, 
yet  it  is  not  as  upon  a  mode  of  extension  or  magnitude.  The  word  '  cha' 
hastheforce  of  involvingthe  addition  of  Viscidity,  fluidity  and  Impetus. 
The  word  ^T^^fa  implies  tactual  perceptibility  ;  or  the  word  l  cha  ' 
should  be  applied  after  the  word  ^T^  fflT  also.  The  plural  number  in 
Numbers,  comprehends  all  numbers,  from  unity  upwards.  If  it  be  held 
that  unity  is  only  a  Genus,  and  not  an  Attribute,  then  if  it  appear  in 
substances  only,  its  denotation  will  be  neither  more  nor  less  than  that 
of  substanceness  ;  if,  on  the  other  hand,  it  be  present  in  attributes  and 
actions  also,  then  its  denotation  will  be  neither  more  nor  lesr  than  that 
of  existence.  "  How,  then,"  if  it  be  asked,"  can  there  be  perception  of 
unity,  etc.,  in  attribute,  etc.  ?,"  it  may  be  answered  that  it  is  by  means 
of  attributed  unity  ;  or  that  by  reason  of  the  proximity  known  as 
combination  or  co-inhere:ice  in  one  and  the  same  object,  the  percep 
tion  of  unity  is  quite  justified.  This  unity  is  eternal  in  eternal  subs 
tances,  and  in  non-eternal  substances  it  has  causal  unity  for  its 
non-combinative  cause.  On  the  other  hand,  duality,  etc.,  are  the 
product  of  relative  understanding.  Relative  understanding  is  the 
mental  basis  or  support  of  various  unities,  when  two  homogeneous  or 
heterogeneous  substances  are  in  contact  with  the  eye.  —  11. 


142  VAI&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

Here  they  are  not. 
Upaskdra.  —  Having  in  view  all  the  above  things  up  to  action,  he  says  : 


Arupisu,  in  substances  not  possessing  colour.  .?r31^ITftr  Achaksu- 
sani,  not  objects  of  visual  perception. 

12.     In  substances  not  possessing  colour,  they  are^not  objects 
of  visual  perception.  —  168. 

Numbers,  etc.,  up  to  action,  are  not  objects  of  visual  perception, 
when  they  are  present  in  substances  which  are  devoid  of  colour.  It 
should  be  observed  that  they  are  not  objects  of  tactual  perception 
also.  It  has  not  been  said  that  they  are  imperceptible  ;  for,  if  it  were 
so,  then  the  unity  of  the  Soul  also  would  not  be  an  obiect  of  percep 
tion.—  12. 

Attribute-ness  and  existence  perceptible  to  all  the  senses. 

Upaskdra.  —  Colour,  etc.,  are  uni-sensuous  or  perceptible  by  the  senses  individually. 
Numbers,  etc.,  are  bi-sensuous  or  perceptible  by  two  senses  jointly.  Pleasure,  etc.,  are 
mental  or  perceptible  by  the  inner  sense.  So  that  it  results  that  the  two  Genera,  Attribute- 
ness  and  existence,  are  omni-sensuous.  tSo  he  says  : 


I  8  I  ?  I  U  H 

t$;f  Etena,  by  this.  flUF^T  Gunatve,  in  regard  to  attributeness.  *n3T 
Bhuve,  in  regard  to  existence.  ^  Cha,  and.  ^o^f?^  Sarvvendriyam, 
omni-sensuous.  Relating  to  all  the  senses.  *rr;f  jnanam,  knowledge. 
Vyakhyatam,  explained. 


13.     By  this  it  is  explained  that  knowledge  in  regard  to  attri 
buteness  and  existence,  is  omni-sensuous  or  of  all  the  senses.  —  169. 

Capability  to  apprehend  the  individuals,  is  itself  the  capability  to 
apprehend  the  class.  And  if  the  individuals  are  respectively  appre 
hended  by  all  the  senses,  then  it  results  that  also  the  classes,  vizr.f 
Attribute-ness  and  Existence,  are  apprehensible  by  all  the  senses. 
This  is  the  meaning.  —  13. 

Here  ends  the   first  chapter    of  the  fourth  book  in    the  Commentary 
•  of  Sankara  upon  the  Vai&esika  Aphorisms. 


KANADA  SftTRAS  IV,  2,  2.  143 


BOOK  FOURTH  __  CHAPTER  SECOND. 

Three-fold  division  of  Earth,  and    other  products, 

Upaskdra.  —  la  the  fourth  book,  of  whio'a  the  subject-matter  is  the  examination  of 
tangible  substances,  intondin;  to  exa:nin3  only  tangible  sub.itanc3s  by  their  effjots,  im  n> 
di&tely  after  the  examination  of  tne  ultimate  atonic  which  are  the  root  causes,  he  says  : 


II  8  I  ^  I  ?  II 

?Tcj;  Tat,  that.  <$*:  Pu'iah,  again.  "jfa$<JfI^frf£'i?J'7  Piithivi-adi-karyya- 
dravyam,  earth,  and  oth9r  produat-substa-ice.  frftsf  Trividham,  three 
fold.  ^f^?'7R^Wir^^^arira-indriya-visaya-samjiiakam,  named  as  body, 
Mease,  and  object. 

1.     The   aforesaid    product-substance,    Earth,    etc.,  is,  again, 
three-fold,  under  the  names  of  body,  sanse,  and  object.  —  170. 

Here  corporeity  or  the  characteristic  of  the  body  is  a  kind  of  upadhi 
or  adjunct,  namely,  the  characteristic  of  being  constituted  by  final  parts 
(i.e.,  atoms),  possessing  activity,  of  which  the  non-combinative  cause  is  the 
conjunction  of  the  soul  exercising  volition.  But  corporeity  is  not  a  class 
-or  universal  eatitiy,  since  in  that  case  Earthness,  etc.,  will  establish 
no  relation  of  higher  and  lower  divisions.  The  characteristic  of  being 
a  sense,  is  the  being  the  seat  of  the  conjunction  of  the  mind,  which  is 
the  cause  of  knowledge  which  produces  no  reminiscence,  or  the  being  a 
seat  of  the  conjunction  of  the  mind,  which  is  the  cause  of  knowledge, 
while  at  the  same  time  it  is  not  a  substratum  of  appreciable  particular 
attributes  other  than  sound.  0;i  the  other  hand,  the  light  of  the  eye  of 
animals  that  prowl  at  night,  is  really  another  kind  of  light.  In  regard 
to  its  being  treated  as  forming  the  visual  sense,  the  words  "  not  being 
a  substratum  of  appreciable  particular  attributes  other  than  sound  aud 
colour  "  should  be  added.  The  characteristic  of  being  a  sense,  how 
ever,  is  not  a  l  class/  for  the  a  the  characteristic  of  Earth,  etc.,  will  not 
establish  the  relation  of  higher  and  lower  divisions  without  entailing 
cross-division).  And  objectivity,  or  the  characteristic  of  being  ari 
object,  although  it  is  the  being  the  means  of  phenomenal  experience, 
that  is  to  say,  the  being  the  object  of  ordinary  perception,  common  to 
substance,  attribute,  action,  genus,  and  non-existence  —  yet  should  be, 
in  accordance  with  the  aphorism,  observed  to  be  the  characteristic  of 
being  a  product-substance  which  is  the  object  of  ordinary  perception, 
for  the  aphorism  is  this  only  that  Earth  and  other  product-substances 
*ire  three-fold.  Objectivity  also,  therefore,  is  not  a  class  or  universal 
entity.  —  -1. 

Body  is  not  a  compound  of  Jive  elements. 

Upaskdra.  —  Now,   in   order   to    refute   the   assertion  that   the  body  is  composed  of  three 
•elements  or  four  elements,  he  says  : 


ii  8  i  ^  i 


144  v  AI£ESX_;A  PHILOSOPHY. 


Pratyaksa-apratyaksanam,  of  perceptible  and  non-per 


ceptible  objects.  ?J4t*fl?T  Samyogasya,  of  conjunction.  ?IR?!fr?3T3;  Apraty- 
ksatvat,  on  account  of  imperceptibility.  TajfiJT^r  Paiichatmakam,  Penta- 
substantial.  Constituted  by  five  elements,  !f  Na,  not.  fifST^  Vidyate,  exists. 


2.  (Nothing  exists,  which  is  constituted  by  five  elements, 
or)  the  body  is  not  constituted  by  five  elements,  for  the  conjunc 
tion  of  things,  perceptible  and  imperceptible,  is  imperceptible.  — 
171. 

Were  the  body,  by  reason  of  its  odour,  moisture,  digestive  heat, 
breath,  and  porosity,  composed  of  five  elements,  then  it  would  be  imper 
ceptible.  In  the  same  manner  as  the  conjunction  of  pen  eptible  and 
imperceptible  objects,  e.g.,  air  and  trees,  is  imperceptible,  the  body 
also  would  be  imperceptible.  Thus  the  aphorism  employs  an  example. 
The  word  '  body  '  is  the  complement  of  "  penta-substantial  does  not 
exist."  Moisture,  digestive  heat,  etc.,  however,  belong  to  the  efficient 
causes  or  conditions  of  the  body,  namely,  water  and  fire.  The  theory 
that  the  body  is  composed  of  four  elements  should  be  also  similarly 
understood.  Let  it  then,  it  may  be  urged,  contain  three  elements,  as 
there  is  perception  of  three  elements.  This  cannot  be,  for  an  origina 
tion  not  of  heterogeneous  elements  is  denied.  One  attribute  in  a  whole 
made  up  of  parts  is  not  originative  of  similar  other  attributes.  If, 
therefore,  the  production  were  from  Earth  and  Water,  then  that  which 
they  originate  would  be  void  of  smell  and  taste.  In  like  manner,  if  it 
originated  in  Earth  and  Fire,  it  would  not  possess  smell,  colour,  and 
taste  ;  if  in  Earth  and  Air,  it  \\ould  be  destitute  of  smell,  taste,  colour, 
and  touch.  Other  cases  should  be  similarly  understood.  —  2. 

Nor  a  compound  of  three  elements. 
Upaskdra.  —  Ho  continues  the  same  topio  : 


II  tf  I  R  I  \  II 

Gruna-antara-apradurbhavat,  by  reason  of  the  non- 
appearance  of  another  attribute.  ^  Cha,  and.  sf  Na,  not.  3^[?JT^J3;  Tri- 
atmakam,  tri-substantial.  Composed  of  three  elements. 

3.  And  by  reason  of  the  non-appearance  of  another  attribute,. 
it  is  not  composed  of  three  elements.  —  172. 

A  body  originated  by  Earth,  Water,  and  Fire  only,  which  are 
objects  of  perception,  might  be  perceived,  if  there  were  manifested  in 
it  another  attribute  having  for  its  antecedent  a  like  attribute  in  the 
cause.  But  this  can  never  be  the  case,  as  it  has  been  already  stated 
that  a  single  smell,  etc.,  is  not  originative.  Therefore  the  body  is  not 
composed  of  'even  three  elements,  i.  e.,  is  not  originated  by  the  three 
elements  possessing  colour.  —  3. 

Bndsya  —  reads  IV.  ii.  3  as  two  aphorisms,  viz.,  "G-undntardprddur- 
bhdvdchcha,"  and  "  Na  trydtmakam." 


KANADA  StTTRAS  IV,  2,  .5  145 


Conjunction  of  various  atoms,  not  denied. 

UpasMra.  —  How  then  is  there    perception  of    digestive  heat,   etc.,  in   one   single   body? 
He  gfves  the  answer  : 


•  II   8  I  R  I  8  II 

V3 

Anusaiiayogah,  conjunction  of  atoms.    3  Tu,  but. 

• 

Apratisiddha^,  not  denied. 

4.     But  a  conjunction  of  atoms  is  not  denied.  —  173. 

A  mutual  eon  junction  of  the  five  elements  as  (the  basis  or)  condi 
tional  causes  of  oue  another,  is  not  denied.  But  it  is  not  desired  that  the 
conjunction  of  two  heterogeneous  atoms  can  be  the  non-combinative 
cause  of  a  substance.  Thus,  as  its  conditional  or  efficient  causes, 
digestive  heat,  etc.,  are  perceived  in  the  body-  If  it  be  asked,  then, 
of  what  nature  the  human  body  is,  the  answer  is  given  by  the  aphorism 
of  Gautama  :  _  "  (The  body  is)  terrene,  the  distinctive  attribute  of 
Ether  being  perceived  (in  it)."  Nyaya-Sutram  III.  i.  28(?}  ).  Smell 
which  is  the  distinctive  attribute  of  Earth,  is  observed  in  the  human 
body  as  not  departing  from  it  till  its  dissolution,  whereas  digestive 
heat,  etc.,  are  not  observed  in  the  decayed  body.  These  attributes, 
therefore,  are  accidental,  while  Smell  is  essential.  Hence  itsterreneness 
is  established.  —  4. 

Body  is  two-fold:  sexually  produced,  and  asexually  produced. 
UpasMra.  —  He  divides  the  body  : 


fljf  Tatra,  therein,  amongst  terrene,  aqueous,  and  other  bodies, 
Sariram,  body,  terrene  body,  fefev*  Dvividham,  two  fold,  qtf^f  Yonijam, 
sex-begotten,  sexually  generated.  IRtfrsn^  Ayonijam,  not  sexually  gene 
rated.  <9  Cha,  and. 

5.  Of  these,  the  body  is  two-fold  :  —  sex-born  and  not  sex-born. 
—  174. 

Of  these,  i.  e.,  among  terrene,  aqueous,  and  other  bodies,  the 
terrene  body  is  two-fold.  What  are  the  two  kinds  ?  In  answer,  he 
says,  l  sexborn  and  not-sex-born/  Aqueous,  igneous,  and  aerial  bodies, 
well-known  in  the  spheres  of  Varuna,  Aditya,  arid  Vayu,  are  entirely 
a-sexual.  A-sexuality  means  independence  of  the  commixing  of  semen 
and  blood.  The  bodies  of  gods  and  sages  are  also  a-sexual,  according 
to  the  text  of  revelation,  "  Manu  and  others,  the  mind-born  or  desire- 
born  of  Brahma."  If  it  be  asked  how  there  can  be  an  effect  without 
a  cause,  we  reply  that  the  female  organ  of  generation  is  not  a  cause 
essential  to  or  determining  corporeity,  as  it  does  not  apply  to  the 
bodies  of  worms,  mosquitoes,  etc.,  produced  by  warmth.  The  posses 
sion  of  a  particular  constitution  also  is  not  proved,  since  our  bodies 
are  different  in  appearance  in  comparision  with  the  bodies  of  goda 
and  sages. 


146  VAI£ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


The  sexaul  body,  again,  is  two-fold,  womb-born  and  egg-born. 
Womb-born  are  bodies  of  men  arid  animals,  wild  and  domestic,  the 
womb  being  the  name  given  to  the  receptacle  of  the  embryo.  The 
bodies  of  birds  and  reptiles  are  egg-born.  Snakes,  worms,  fishes,  etc., 
also  are  really  reptiles,  since  it  is  their  nature  to  crawl  about. 

Trees  and  the  like  also  are  no  doubt  so  many  kinds  of  bodies,  being 
the  seat  of  experience  (i.  e.,  the  field  wherin  particular  souls  reap  the 
consequences  of  their  acts  in  previous  births).  For  without  the  charac 
teristic  of  being  the  seat  of  experience,  life,  death,  sleep,  waking,  use 
of  medicine,  propagation  of  the  seed,  approaching  the  agreeable,  avoid 
ing  the  disagreeable,  etc.,  would  be  impossible.  And  growth  and  the 
healing  up  of  wounds  and  fractures,  which  prove  experience,  are  mani 
fest  in  them.  There  is  also  the  sacred  text  : 


"  The  Sarala  and  Arjuna  trees,  which  grow  on  the  banks  of  the 
Narmada  from  contact  with  the  waters  of  the  Narmada,  attain  to  the 
highest  state  hereafter,"  etc.  And  also, 


"  In  the  cemetery  grows  a  tree  haunted  by  herons  and  vultures, 
etc.,"  etc.  Yet  germinant  bodies  do  not  evidently  possess  activity  or 
movement  and  senses,  and  they  are  therefore  not  treated  as  bodies.  —  5. 

Vivriti.  —  That  trees,  etc.,  are  bodies  (i.  e.,  ground  of  the  experience 
of  the  consequences  of  acts)  is  evidenced  by  the  text  of  Manu,  viz.,  "A 
man  acquires  the  candition  of  an  immovable  existence,  by  faults  of 
action,  born  of  the  body.'' 

A-sexual  bcdies,  how  produced. 
Upasltdra.—'S.Q  states  the  cause  from  whioh  asexual    bodies  are  produced  : 


II    $   1  R  I    ^   II 

A-niyata-dik-desa-purvakatvat,  because  it(».  «., 
a-sexual  body)  has  for  its  antecedent  ultimate  atoms  which  are  not 
constant  in  direction  aud  place. 

6.     Because   a-sexual    bodies    are    formed  by  ultimate  atoms 
inconstant  in  direction  and  place.  —  175. 

Ultimat  atoms,  inconstant  in  direction  and  place,  possess  activity 
or  movement  produced  by  a  particular  dharma  or  virtue.  And  they 
are  tho  antecedents  of  a-sexual  bodies.  —  6. 


i.  —  In  the  words  of  Varuna,  etc.,  there  exist  a-sexual, 
aqueous,  igneous,  aerial,  and  mental  bodies,  which  are  not  dependent, 
for  their  production,  upon  semen,  blood,  etc.  Whence  come  the  ultimate 
atoms  which  orignate  them  ?  In  the  case  of  sexual  bodies,  it  is  observ 
ed  that  only  the  ultimate  atoms  of  semen  and  blood  are  their  origina 
tors.  To  remove  this  apprehension,  the  present  aphorism  has  been 


KANADA  SUTRAS  IV,  2,8.  147 


formulated.  Terrene,  aqueous,  igneous,  and  aerial  ultimate  atoms  exist 
in  all  directions  and  in  all  places.  Since  there  is  nothing  to  confine  them 
to  direction  and  place,  there  can  be  no  scarcity  of  ultimate  atoms  in  the 
production  of  a-sexual  bodies  For  it  is  not  the  case  that  ultimate 
atoms  other  than  the  ultimate  atoms  of  semen  and  blood,  are  not  ori 
ginative  of  bodies,  seeing  lhat  in  that  case  there  would  be  no  produc 
tion  of  gnats,  mosquitoes,  trees,  shrubs,  etc. 

A-sexual  bodies,  how  produced  —  continued. 

Upaskdra.  —  It  may  be  objected,  how  there  ean  be  preduction  of  a  substance  (»'.  «.,  a  body), 
without  conjunction  which  is  the  non-oembinative  cause  of  substance,  seeing  that  there  can 
be  no  conjunction  without  the  action  of  the  ultimate  atoms.  Heuoe  he  says  : 


H  a  i  *  i  vs  u 

Dharmnia-visesat,  from  a  particular  dharma  or  virtue.    ^ 
Cha,  and. 

7.     And    (the    action   of  the    ultimate    atoms   arises)  from  a 
particular  dharma  or  virtue.  —  176. 

The  sense  is  that,  at  the  beginning  of  creation,  action  or  motion 
arises  in  the  ultimate  atoms  in  consequence  only  of  the  conjunction  of 
the  soul  carrying  with  it  the  invisible  (adristam)  consequences  of  its 
previous  acts,  and  the  ultimate  atoms,  having  by  that  action  come 
together,  originate,  in  the  order  of  binary  atomic  aggregate,  etc., 
the  a-sexual  badies  of  gods  and  sages. 

The  aphorism  is  illusrative.  It  should  be  also  observed  that,  in 
consequence  of  particular  adharma  or  vices,  the  tortured  bodies  of  mos 
quitoes  and  other  small  insects,  generated  by  heat,  are  produced.  —  7. 

Proof  of  their  existence. 
Upskdra.  —  He  gives  another  proof  that  the  bodies  of  gods  and  sages  are  a-sexual  : 

n  8  i  *  \  *  u 


Samakhya-bhavat.,    because    name  or  definitions    exist. 
^  Cha,   also, 

8.     Also  because  names  or  definitions  exist.  —  177. 

^nn^  means  a  significant  name,  or  definition,  such  as  is  well- 
known  in  Sruti,  Itihasa,  Purana,  etc.  Thus,  Durvasas,  and  other  sages 
were  born  from  the  mind  (of  Brahma)  ;  Angiras  was  produced  from 
ahamkdra  (the  sense  of  *  I")  ;  and  so  on.  From  this  also  it  is  known 
that  there  ar  ©  a-sexual  bodies  of  gods  and  sages.  —  8. 

Yviriti.  _  But  whence  do  a-sexual  bodies  derive  their  names,  in  the 
absence*  of  parents,  etc.  ?  For  it  is  observed  on  earth  that  the  names 
Chaitra,  Maitra,  etc.,  are  affixed  by  parents,  etc.  Lest  there  be  such  an 
apprehension,  so  he  says  : 

1  Bhavat/  i.  e.,  from  the  existence,  of  '  Samakhya,'  i.  e.,  the  name  ; 
i  even  in  the  absence  of  the  procreative  parents,  etc.'  is  the  complement. 


148  VAlSESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


For,  all  names  are  not  affixed  only  by  parents,  etc.,  as  it  is  not  the  case 
with  the  names,  water-pot,  canvas,  etc.  Therefore,  the  import  is  that 
the  names,  Ma'iu,  Marichi,  etc.,  have  been  put  upon  a-sexual  bodies,  by 
the  very  same  Isvara  by  whom  names  have  been  affixed  to  the  water-pot, 
canvas,  and  other  unconscious  objects. 

A-sexual  bodies,  how  produced. — continued. 
Upaslidra. — Ho  gives  another  proof  : 

n  s  i  ^  i  s.  n 

i-*  Samjnayah,  of  name,  ^fftc^  A-ditvat,  because  of  the  primitive- 


ness. 


9.     (The    existence    of  a-sexual    bodies    is    proved)  from  the 
primitiveness  of  the  name.  —  178. 

By  means  of  the  name,  Brahma,  etc.,  which  came  to  be  the  begin 
ning,  i.  e.j  primordial,  at  the  beginning  of  creation,  it  is  known  that 
a-sexual  body  exists.  For  then  there  were  net  parents  of  Brahma,  by 
whom  the  name  Brahma,  etc.,  should  be  given.  —  9. 

Vivriti.  —  But  there  being  no  proof  of  the  existence  of  tsvara,  how 
can  it  be  affirmed  that  the  names  of  the  water-pot,  the  canvas,  etc.,  have 
been  given  by  Him  ?  So  he  says  : 

Because  livara,  which  is  the  complement  of  the  aphorism,  ia  the 
beginning  (adi),  i.  e.,  the  cause  or  source,  of  names.  Thus  the  proof  of 
fsvara  having  been  already  stated,  by  the  characteristic  of  His  being 
the  author  of  names,  in  the  aphorism,  "  But  name  and  effect  are  the 
mark  (of  the  existence)  of  beings  distinguished  from  ourselves"  (II.  i. 
18  Ibid;,  being  the  author  of  names  remains  unobstructed.  This  is 
the  sense. 

Conclusion  :     A-sexual  bodies  exist. 
UpasTcdra.  —  He  concludes  : 


Santi,  exist.  SHftfr3T|:    Ayonijah,  a-sexual  bodies. 
10.     A-sexual  bodies  exist.  —  179. 

The  words  "  particular  forms  of  bodies  "  are  the  complement  of  the 
aphorism  —  10. 

Another  proof  that  a-sexual  bodies  exist. 

UpasTcdra.  —  In  order  to  strengthen  the  above  cooclu.sion  all   the    more,   he  gives   aiother 
proof  : 


n  s  i  ^  i  \\\\ 

Veda-lingat,  from  the  texts  which  throw  light  upon  the 
mantra  portion  'of  the  Veda,  i.  e.,  from  the  Brahmana  portion  of  the 
Veda.  =gf  Cha,  and. 


KANiDA  StTTRAS  IV,  2,  11.  149 

11.     (The    existence    of    a-sexual    bodies  is  proved)  also  from 
the  Brahamana  portion  of  the  Veda.  —  18J. 

1  Veda  '  means  mantra.  That  by  which  it  is  linjyate,  i.  e.,  made 
known,  is  '  veda-lingam/  i.  e.}  Brdhmanam.  From  this  also  a-sexual 
body  is  proved.  This  is  the  meaning.  Thus  there  is  the  Brdhmanam  : 


"  Prajapti  (i.  e.,  the  lord  of  creation)  created  numerous  creatures  : 
He  practised  peaauce,  with  the  desire,  "  I  may  be  able  to  create 
creatures."  He  created  the  Brahmana  from  His  mouth,  King  from  his 
arms,  the  Vaisya  from  His  thighs,  the  Sudra  from  his  feet.  " 

There  is  also  the  Veda  : 


"  His  mouth  became  the  Brahmana  ;  the  arms  were  made  the  King 
i.  e.j  Kstriya)  ;  it  was  His  thigh,  which  became  the  Vaisya  ;  the  Sudra 
was  born  from  the  feet,  etc." 

Thus  terrene  body,  sexual  and  a-sexual,  has  been  described  in  the 
above  way.  Aqueous,  igneous,  and  aerial  bodies  can  be  only  a-sexual, 
since  semen  and  blood  are,  as  a  rule,  terrene,  and  a  terrene  substance 
does  not  originate  an  aqueous  one. 

The  terrene  sense  is  the  organ  of  smell,  common  to  all  living  beings. 
The  organ  of  smell  is  originated  by  terrene  particles  unoverpowered  or 
unobscured  by  water,  etc.  The  organ  of  smell  is  terrene,  because  it 
causes  manifestation  of  smell,  while  it  does  not  cause  the  manifestation  of 
taste,  etc.,  like  the  excrement  of  the  fowl  which  causes  the  manifestation 
of  the  perfume  of  the  musk.  Similarly,  the  organ  of  taste,  the  tongue, 
is  the  aqueous  sense,  as  it  causes  the  manifestation  of  taste  only,  while 
it  does  not  cause  the  manifestation  of  colour,  etc,,  like  water  which 
causes  the  manifestation  of  the  taste  of  the  pudding.  In  like  manner, 
the  eye  is  the  igneous  sense,  because  it  causes  the  manifestation  of 
colour  only,  while  it  does  not  cause  the  manifestation  of  taste,  etc.,  like 
light.  The  skin  is  the  aerial  sense,  because  it  causes  the  manifestation 
of  touch  only,  while  it  does  not  cause  the  manifestation  of  smell,  etc., 
like  the  wind  blown  by  the  fan  which  causes  the  manifestation  of  the 
coolness  of  the  water  (perspiration)  sticking  to  the  body. 

The  object  which  is  terrene,  is  characterised  as  earth,  stone,  and 
the  immoveable.  Therein  the  modifications  of  earth  are  the  divisions  of 
the  land,  wall,  brick,  etc.,  Stones  are  the  troantains,  jewels,  diamond, 
red-chalk,  etc.  The  irnm^veable  are  grass,  herbs,  trees,  shrubs, 
creepers,  and  trees  bearing  fruits  without  flowers.  Aqueous  objects  are 
rivers,  seas,  dew,  hail-stone,  etc.  Igneous  object  is  four-fold,  differen 
tiated  as  terrestrial,  celestial,  abdominal,  and  mineral.  Tlie  terrestrial 
is  that  which  is  produced  from  fuel,  such  as  wood.  The  celestial  is  not 
produced  from  fuel  ;  e.  g.,  lightning,  etc.  The  abdominal  is  the  sto 
machic,  capable  of  extracting  the  juice  of  rice,  etc.  And  the  mineral 
is  gold,  etc.  .The  aerial  object  is  the  wind  wdich  is  the  seat  or  support 
>  -of  touch  which  can  be  felt.  The  fourth  effect  of  Air,  which  is  called 


150  VAlgESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

Prdna;  i.e.,  the  life-breath,  and  which  is  the  means  of  disposing  of  the 
essences  (rasa),  excreta;  and  the  humours  or  \ital  fluids  (dhdtu')  within 
the  body,  though  it  is  one,  still  acquires  the  names  of  Apfina  (i.e.,  the 
»ir  which  throws  out)'  etc.,  according  to  the  diversity  of  its  func 
tions. — 11. 

Here    ends  the    second    chapter  of  the    fourth  book  in  the  Commen 
tary  of  Sankara  upon  the  Vaisesika  Aphorisms  of  Kanada. 


KANADA  SfrTRAS  IV,  2,2.  151 

BOOK   FIFTH—  CHAPTER  FIRST. 

Action   in  the    hand,  how   produced. 

Upaskdra.  —  The  subject  of  the  fifth  book  is  the  investigation  of  Action.  The  investi 
gation  of  Action,  producible  by  volition,  is  the  subject  of  the  first  chapter.  In  this  there 
are  sections  treating  of  (1)  throwing  upwards,  (2)  throwing  upwards  effected  without  volition, 
<3)  action  which  has  virtue  or  merit  as  its  cause,  and  (4)  actions,  goods,  bad,  and  indifferent. 


II  VI  I  t  I  t  II 

Atma-seHa.yoga-prayatnabh.yslm,    by   means  of    con 


junction  with,  and  volition  of,  the  soul.    f^"   Haste,    in    the    hand. 
Karmma,  action. 

1.  Action  in  hand  (is  produced)  by  means  of  conjunction 
with,  and  volition  of,  the  Soul.  —  181. 

With  reference  to  a  particular  form  of  muscular  or  bodily  action, 
(e.  (jr.,  in  using  a  pestle  and  mortar),  the  author  says  : 

By  means  of  conjunction  and  volition  of  the  soul,  Action  (is  pro 
duced)  in  the  hand  which  is  its  combinative  cause.  And  of  this 
Action,  conjunction  with  the  soul  exercising  volition,  is  the  non- 
combinative  cause,  aid  volition  is  the  efficient  or  conditional  cause.  It  is 
this  which  is  called  muscular  action  ,  for  muscular  action  is  action  which 
has  for  its  non-combinative  cause  conjunction  with  the  soul  exercising 
volition,  or  action  producible  by  volition  of  something  other  than,  that 
which  possesses  touch  and  which  is  not  combined  with,  and  is  additonal 
which  to  that  in  which  the  action  appears  (e.g.,  hand.)  —  1. 

Vivriti-  —  Here  5^  'in  the  hand,'  is  an  illustration.  The  meaning 
is  that  by  the  conjunction,  and  volition,  of  the  soul,  action,  in  the  form 
of  muscular  motion,  is  caused  in  the  body  as  well  as  in  the  parts  there 
of.  So  it  has  been  said. 


That  which  is  produced  by  the  Soul,  may  be  called  Desire.  That 
which  is  prodnced  by  Desire,  may  be  called  first  Impulse  or  stir.  That 
which  is  produced  by  Impulse,  may  be  called  muscular  motion.  It  it 
that  which  is  produced  by  muscular  motion,  that  may  be  called  Action 
or  physical  change. 

Action  in  the  pestle  described. 

Upaskdra.—A.Her  describing  the  throwing  upwards  of  the  hand,  he  describes   the   throw 
ing  upwards  of  the  pestle,  which  depends  upon  the  former  : 


n  *  i  n  *  u 

Tatha,  similar.  iJ^tf^HtTT^  Hasta-sarayogat,  from  conjunction  with 
the  hand.  ^  Cha,  and.  g^f  Musale,  in  the  pestle,  qpfff  Karmma,  action. 

2.     And,  from  conjunction   with  the  hand,  a   similar   Action 
appears  in  the  pestle.  —  182. 


152  VAlSESIKA  PHILOSOPHY 


The  word  '  cha  '  implies  '  gravity/  which  is  another  efficient  cause. 
*  Tatha  '  means  'like  that/  i.  e.,  of  the  form  of  throwing  upwards.  Or 
'  tatha  '  and  '  hasta-sasayogat  '  may  be  taken  as  constituting  a  single 
term,  which  will  then  mean  'from  conjunction  with  hand  possessing 
upward  motion.'  Here,  again,  conjunction  of  the  pestle  with  the  hand 
conjoined  with  the  soul  exercising  volition,  is  the  non-combinative 
cause  ;  the  pestle  is  the  combinative  cause  ;  volition  and  gravity  are  the 
efficient  causes.  —  2. 

Above  continued. 

Upaskdra.  —  He  states  the  caiise  of  tho  sudden   motion  upward  which  is   produced  in   the 
pestle  when  struck  by  the  mortar  : 


:  II  *  I  ?  I  \  II 


Abhighata-je,  produced  by  impact.  gqfaT^  Musat.adau,  in 
the  pestle,  etc.  ^rwffiif  Karmmani,  in  action,  sqf^fri^  Vyatirekat,  because 
of  absence  (of  volition).  3T^TT?;*rf  Akaranam,  not  cause.  l^rT^ftr:  Hasta- 
BaBayogah,  conjunction  with  the  hand, 

3.  In  the  action,  produced  in  the  pestle,  etc.,  by  impact, 
conjunction  with  the  hand  is  not  a  cause,  because  of  the  absence 
(of  volition).—  183. 

Here,  though  there  is  also  conjunction  of  the  hand  with  the  rising 
pestle,  yet  that  conjunction  possesses  no  causality  On  the  other  hand, 
the  impact  of  the  mortar  only  is  the  non-combinative  cause.  It  may  be 
asked,  u  Why  so?"  Therefore  he  adds,  *  vyatirekat/  which  means 
because  of  the  absence  of  operativeness  of  volition."  If  there  were 
volition  at  that  moment,  there  would  surely  be  no  sudden  upward  motion 
in  the  pestle.  By  a  volition  to  hold  fast,  there  would  be  rather  susten 
tion  of  the  pestle  ;  or,  the  upward  motion  again  of  the  pestle  would  be 
caused  by  muscular  action.  This  is  the  import.  —  3. 

Vivriti.  —  Conjunction  with  the  hand  is  not  the  combinative  cause. 
*  Conjunction  '  is  indicative.  Volition  and  muscular  action  also,  it 
should  be  understood,  are  not  the  efficient  causes. 

Action  in  the  hand. 

"Upaskdra.  —  With  a  view  to  specify  a  particular  cause  of  the  action  of  the  hand,  as  it 
flies  upward  with  tho  pestle,  and  for  the  purpose  of  disproving  the  non-combinative  causality 
of  conjunction  with  the  soul  exercising  volition,  he  says  : 


u  *  i  n  8  n 


Tatha,  the  same,  i.  e.,  not  a  cause.  ^fTrfl^f^tT:  Atma-samyogah,  con 
junction  with  the  soul.  l^rRTWTcftr  Hasta-karmmani,  in  the  action  of  the 
hand. 

4.     In   the   case   of  action  of  the  hand,  ccnjunction  with  the 
soul  is  not  a  cause.  —  184. 


KANADA  StTTRAS  V,  1,  6.  153 

In  the  case  of  the  action  of  the  hand,  as  it  springs  upwards  with 
the  pestle,  '  conjunction  with  the  soul,'  i.  e  ,  conjunction  with  the  soul 
exercising  volition,  is  '  the  same,  i.  e.,  not  a  cause.  The  term  '  not-a- 
cause  '  which  appears  in  the  preceding  aphorism,  is  carried  over  here 
by  (  tatha.'  the  same.  —  4. 

Vivriti.  —  Yhis  too  is  illustrative.  If  shouln  be  understood  that 
that  volition  also  is  not  a  non-common  efficient  cause. 

Above  continued. 

Upaskdra.  —  "  Whence  then  at  that  time  the   upward  motiou   in  the  hand  "  ?  In  answer 
to  this,  he  says  : 


H  U*  I  3  I  U>  II 


Abhighatat,  from  impact.  JjJW^nftTT^  Musala-sarayogat,  from 
conjunction  with  the  Beetle.  5^"  Hoste,  in  the  hand.  ^WT^Karmma,  action. 

5.  The  action  (i.  e.,  upward  motion)  in  the  hand  is  from 
impact,  and  from  conjunction  with  the  pestle.  —  185. 

As,  when  the  pestle  flies  upwards,  the  iron-ring  at  the  end  of  the 
}  estle  rises  upwards,  so  the  hand  also  at  that  time  springs  upwards. 
Here  by  the  word,  '  impact,'  re-action  (i.  e.,  recoil)  produced  by 
impact,  is  expressed  by  transference.  By  the  vigorous  action  of  the 
up-going  pestle,  accompanied  with  the  impact,  re-action  or  recoil  is 
produced  in  the  pestle  itself  which  is  the  substratum  of  that  subs 
tratum  of  that  action.  Subject  to  the  re-action  so  effected,  upward 
motion  appears  in  the  hand  also,  in  consequence  of  the  conjunction  of 
the  hand  and  the  pestle,  as  its  non-combinative  cause  ;  and  not  that 
this  upward  motion  has  for  its  non-combinative  cause  conjunction  with 
the  soul  exercising  volition,  for  the  hand  rises  involuntarily  together 
with  the  pestle.  This  is  the  idea.  —  5. 

Action  in  the  body. 

Upaxkara.  —  "  well,"  it  may  be  asked,  "  conjunction  with  theisoul  exercising  volition  is 
the  cause  of  the  action  which  is  produced  in  the  body  or  in  a  part  of  the  body.  Why  is  it 
«ot  so  in  the  present  instance  "  ?  Henoe  he  says  : 


II  U.  I   t   I   3  II 

Atma-karmma,  action  of  the  body,  and  its  members. 
Hasta-samyogat,  from  conjunction  with  the  hand,  ^r  Cha,  and,  also. 

6.     Action  of  the  body  and  its  members  is  also  from  conjunc 
tion  with  the  hand.—  186. 

The  word  '  atma,'  by  transference,  means  the  body  and  its  parts, 
For,  impossibility  of  order  or  coherence  in  the  text,  is  the  germ  of  a 
transference  of  epithet.  Thus  the  action  which  appears  in  a  part  of 
the  body  also,  that  is,  in  the  hand,  arises  from  the  conjunction  of  the 
hand  and  the  pestle.  Th«  would  l  cha  '  implies  also  impetus.  In  the- 
action  of  the  hand,  conjunction  with  the  hand  is  really  th«  non-combi- 


154  VAI£E§IKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

native  cause.  There  is  no  deviation  or  breach  of  uniformity  in  this 
respect.  This  conjunction  is  sometimes  conjunction  with  the  soul 
exercising  volition,  and  sometimes  conjunction  of  the  hand  with  pestle, 
•etc.,  possessing  impetus,  as  is  the  case  with  the  action  of  the  body  and 
its  parts,  of  a  mad  man.  —  6. 

Falling  how  produced. 
Upask&ra.  —  Ho  begins  the  section  on  action'  independent  of  volition  : 


II  *  I  ?  I  V9  II 

Sarayoga-abhave,    in  the    absence    of    conjunction. 
Gurutvat,  from  gravity.  WTflC  Patanam,  falling. 

7.     In    the    absence   of    conjunction,    falling     (results)    from 
gravity.  —  187. 

By  the  term,  '  conjunction,'  every  kind  of  impediment  is  indicated. 
Hence  in  the  absence  of  impediments,  in  consequence  of  gravity  as  its 
non-combinative  cause,  falling  i.  e.,  an  action  resulting  in  conjunction 
below,  is  produced.  Here  in  fruit,  etc.,  possessing  gravity,  the  impedi 
ment  is  conjunction  ;  in  a  bird,  etc.,  however,  volition  to  hold  up  is  the 
impediment  to  falling  ;  in  an  arrow,  etc.,  when  discharged,  it  is  the  re 
action  that  is  the  impediment  to  falling.  The  meaning  is  that,  in  the 
absence  of  these,  falling  is  caused  by  gravity.  In  the  case  of  holding 
up  of  poison,  etc.,  in  the  air,  by  thought-transference,  etc.,  conjunction 
with  the  soul  endowed  with  adristam  (invisible  after-effects  of  pre 
vious  acts),  or  mantra,  and  the  like  are  really  the  impediments.  These 
also  are  included  by  the  term  '  conjunction.'  —  7. 

Bhdsya.  —  reads  Samskdra  in  the  place  of  Sam-yoga. 

Falling     how    produced  —  continued. 

Upaskdra.  —  Will,  if  falling  is  caused  by  gravity,  then  how  can  there  be  sometimes  an 
upward,  and  sometimes  a  sideward  motion  in  a  stone,  etc.,  when  thrown  up  ?  To  meet  this 
objection,  he  says  : 


I  \  I  c:  II 

Nodana-visesa-abhavat,     owing    to    the  absence    of    a 


particular  movement  or  impulse.    ?T    Na,    not.  3^>^    Urddhvam,  upward. 
*f  Na,  not.  ffc4«f»  Triyyak,  oblique,  sideward.  JUT^flC  Gamanam,  going. 

8.  Owing  to  the  absence  of  a  particular  molecular  movement, 
there  arises  no  upward  or  sideward  motion  (in  the  fruit,  bird,  and 
arrow).  —  188. 

The  upward  or  sideward  motion  which  takes  place  in  a  stone,  arrow, 
etc.,  though  they  possess  gravity,  results  from  a  particular  i.  «.,  a 
violent,  molecular  movement.  So  that  in  the  case  of  the  falling  of  a 
fruit,  a  bird,  an  arrow,  etc.,  in  the  absence  of  conjunction,  volition, 
3,nd  re-action,  there  does  not  exist  a  particular  movement,  and  conse 
quently  there  is  no  upward  or  sideward  motion.  This  is  the  sense.  —  8. 


KANADA  SftTRAS  V,  1,  11.  155 

Above     continued. 

Upnskdra.—But,  whenoo  is  particular  molecular   movement  itself  produced  ?     Ho  gives 
the  answer  : 


II  VI  I  t  I  &  II 

.   Prayatna-visesat,    from  a    particular    volition.    5 
Nodana-viSesah,  particular  molecular  movement  or  impulse. 

9,     Particular  molecular   movement  (results)  from   particular 
volition.  —  189. 

Particular  volition  is  caused  by  the  desire  "  I  will  throw  sidewardr 
upward,  far,  or  near."  By  this,  particular  nodana  or  molecular  move 
ment  is  produced,  from  which  upward  or  sideward  motion  is  possible 
produced  in  a  substance  possessing  gravity,  a.  </.,  a  stone,  etc.  —  9. 

Throwing  far  away,  how  produced. 
(Tpaskdra.  —  '  Udasanara  '  means  throwing  far  upwards. 


,  Nodana-viSesat,  from  a    particular    molecular  movement. 
Udasana-visesah,  particular  throwing  away. 

10.  From  particular  molecular  movement,  (results)  particular 
throwing  away.  —  190. 

Vivriti.  —  sftvrt^faRfc  *•  «•>  from  a  heterogeneous  molecular  move- 
tuont  produced  by  the  aforesaid  volition,  33CTTq,  i.  e.,  throwing  high 
upwards,  going  upwards,  *Rfrf,  »'•  e.,  takes  place,  which  completes  the 
aphorism.  Thus,  by  agreement  and  difference,  the  causality  of  parti 
cular  molecular  movement  toward  upward  motion,  is  proved.  a^TT^, 
going  upwards,  is  an  indication.  Sideward  motion,  etc.,  also  should  be 
understood. 

Non-volitional  action,  not  a  cause  of  virtue  or  vice. 

Upask-lra.  —  The  action  which  is  produced  in  the  hand  together  with  the  pestle,  by  th& 
impact  of  the  mortar,  is  not  at  all  preceded  by  volition,  nor  is  it  the  source  of  virtue  and  vice. 
He  extends  a  similar  nature  to  the  playful  movements  of  the  hands  and  feet,  etc.,  of  a  child  : 


541H9MMH  II  %  I  t  I  K  II 

Hasta-karmmana,  by  the  action  of  the  hand.  3T<<$'<#uf  Daraka- 
karmma,  the  action  of  a  child.  itWRlftfC  Vyakhyatam,  explained. 

11.     By  the  action  of  the   hand,    the    action   of  a   child  (has 
been)  explained.  —  191. 

Although  a  child's  movement  of  its  hands,  feet,  etc.,  is  surely  pre 
ceded  by  effort,  it  has  not  for  its  result  the  acquisition  of  the  good  and 
the  avoidance  of  the  evil,  nor  is  it  consequently  a  source  of  virtue  and 
vice.  This  is  the  meaning  of  the  extension  or  analogy.  —  11. 


But  how  is  action,  in    the    form    of    sideward  and  upward. 
motion,  of  the  hands  and  feet  of  a  child  lying  on  the   lap,   produced,   in. 


156  VAI&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


the  absence  therefrom  of    the    particular    molecular  movement    or    im 
pulse  ?     So  he  says  ; 

By  the  action  of  the  hand,  of  the  form  of  throwing  upwards,  etc., 
simultaneous  with  the  throwing  upwards  of  a  stone,  the  action,  i,  e.,  the 
throwing  upwards  of  the  hands  and  feet,  of  a  child,  is  explained,  i.  e., 
proved.  Thus,  a  particular  molecular  movement  is  not  the  cause  of  all 
throwing  high  upwards,  but  only  of  particular  acts  of  throwing  high 
upwards.  Hence  the  throwing  upwards  of  the  hands  and  feet  of  a  child 
is  not  unproved.  Otherwise,  the  throwing  upwards  of  the  hands  of 
one  who  throws  up  a  stone,  etc.,  will  be  also  unproved. 

Certain  volitional  action  altsn,  not  a  cause  of  -virtue  or  vice. 

Upaskdra.  —  Now,  extending  similarity  to  the  action  of  a  child  to    action    which  ,    though 
preceded  by  volition,  is  yet  not  the  cause  of  a  virtue  and  vice,  he  says  : 


n  *i  i  ?  i  ?R  u 

Tatha,  the  same.  ^T^J    Dagdhasya,    of  a    burnt    person. 
Visphotane,  in  the  case  of  a  boil. 

12.  The  same  (is  action  directed  towards  the  killing  of  a 
felon),  when  (a  house  being  set  on  fire  by  him)  the  body  of  a 
person  burnt  therein,  is  torn  open  by  fire.  —  192. 

A  house  being  set  on  fire  by  a  felon  and  in  it  boils  being  caused  to 
a  person  burnt  by  the  fire,  action  which  is  produced  in  the  hand,  etc., 
by  volition  directed  towards  the  killing  of  that  felon,  is  neither  a  cause 
of  virtue  nor  a  cause  of  vice  ;  as  it  has  been  said,  "  In  the  slaying  of  a 
felon,  there  is  no  sin  in  him  that  slays  openly  or  covertly  :  wrath 
encounters  wrath.  An  incendiary,  a  poisoner,  an  assassin,  a  thief,  a 
ravisher  of  wife  and  field,  —  these  six  are  felons.  "  —12. 

V'ivriti  —  Sometimes  throwing  upwards,  etc.,  result  also  from  parti 
cular  molecular  movements  which  are  not  dependent  upon  particular 
volition  produced  by  the  desires,  "  I  throw  upwards,"  etc.  This  he 
points  out  : 

5*\=r^T,  of  a  burnt  body,  building,  fruit,  etc.  ;  f^rlte^,  in  the  going 
sideward  and  upward  of  their  parts  ;  <T«IT  ?  molecular  movement,  caused 
by  a  particular  volition,  is  not  the  cause.  This  is  the  meaning. 

Non-volitional  action  in  the  body  described. 
Upaskdra.  —  Now,  he  points  out  actions  which  take  place  without  volition. 


n  *  i  ?  i  ^  n 

Yatna-abhave,  in  the  absence  of  volition.  M^dfrU  Prasuptasya, 
of  the  sleeping.  ^FTJ^  Chalanam,  movement. 


13.     Movement  of  the  sleeping  (takes    place)  in    the    absence 
of  volition.  —  193. 

The  word'  prasuptasya'  implies  the  state  of  absence  of  conscious 
ness.  Therefore,  the  movement  caused  by  air  in  the  unconscious  state 
of  a  person  in  swoon,  while  living,  should  be  observed  here.  —  13. 


KANlDA  SftTRAS  V,  1,  15.  157 


Vivriti.  —  Even  in  the  absence  of  volition  caused  by  the  desire,  "  I 
throw  up,"  etc.,  'movement  '  of  the  body,  i.  e.,  action  such  as  the  side 
ward  and  upward  movements  of  the  limbs  of  a  person  'sleeping'  or 
attended  with  deep  sleep,  is  produced.  Therefore,  a  particular  voli 
tion  is  not  everywhere  the  cause.  This  is  the  import. 

Action    in  things  other    than  the  body. 
Upaslcdra.  —  Having  explained  the  actions  of  the  body,  he  treats  of  other  actions  : 


n  %  i  *  i  *  9  n 

rjjrfr  Trine,  in  the  grass.  ^frwf  Karmma,  action.  ^HJ^T^tTT^  Vayu-samyogat, 
from  conjunction  with  air. 

14.     Action  in  the  grass    (arises)    from    conjunction    with  air. 

—  194. 

By  the  term  '  grass/  he  implies  trees,  shrubs,  creepers,  and  all  such 
other  objects  —  14. 


Vivriti.  —  He  points  out  .similar  other  actions  also. 

Even  in  the  absence  of  a  particular  volition,  from  conjunction  with 
-air,  action  is  produaed  in  the  grass. 

Action   produced  by  adristam. 
UpasMra.  —  Enumerating  actions  dependent  upon  adcistam,  he  says  : 


II  %  I  3  I  ?V,  || 

JTT^WfMani-gamanam,  movement  of  the  jewel.  ^qfaspfqi  Suchi- 
abhisarpanam,  approach  of  the  needle.  ^TfgsRW^  Adrista-karanakam, 
have  adristam,  (i.e.,  the  invisible  consequences  of  previous  acts)  as  their 
cause. 

15.     The  movement  of    the  jewel,   and    the   approach  of    the 
needle,  adristam  as  their  cause.  —  195. 

By  the  term  '  jewel,'  bell-metal,  etc.,  are  implied.  In  the  going 
which  takes  place,  therefore,  of  the  jewel,  bell-metal,  etc.,  informed  with 
mantra  or  incantation,  towards  the  thief,  there,  of  that  movement  the 
jewel,  etc.,  are  the  combinative  cause,  conjunction  of  the  jewel  with  the 
.Sjul  of  the  thief  possessed  of  adristam,  is  the  non-combinative  cause,  and 
the  vice  of  the  thief  is  the  efficient  or  instrumental  cause.  By  the  word 
*  needle,'  in  '  the  approach  of  the  needle/  all  metal  as  well  as  grass  are 
implied.  Thus,  in  the  case  of  the  movement  of  the  needle,  etc.,  towards 
that  which  is  attractive  of  iron  (i.  e.,  the  magnet),  and  of  the  movement 
of  grass  towards  that  which  is  attractive  of  grass,  the  needle,  etc.  are 
the  combinative  cause,  conjunction  with  the  soul  of  the  person  possess 
ed  of  adristam,  who  is  affected  for  good  or  for  bad  by  that  movement 
of  the  grass,  the  needle,  etc.,  is  the  non-combinative  cause,  and  his 
yery  adristam,  is  the  instrumental  cause.  Other  instances,  e.  g.  the 
naming  upwards  of  fire,  the  sideward  motion  of  air,  the  action  of  the 
ultimate  atoms  at  the  beginning  of  creation,  etc.,  should  be  similarly 
understood.  —  15. 


158  VAlgfiSIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

Vivfiti.  —  By  the  terra,  '  jewel/  are  intended  vessels  made  of  gold, 
etc.,  and  filled  with  water.  To  such  a  vessel  magicians  apply  incanta 
tions  for  the  recovery  of  stolen  property.  The  tradition  of  the  ancients  is- 
this.  The  vessel  is  set  on  the  grou  id,  and  some  other  person  lays  his- 
right  hand  upon  it.  The  vessel  accompanied  with  the  hand,  in  conse 
quence  of  the  efficacy  of  the  incantation,  moves  towards  the  spot  where- 
the  stolen  property  has  been  deposited,  and  on  reaching  that  place, 
stops. 

The  reason  of  the  movement  of  such  a  vessel  is  not  a  particular 
volition,  but  the  efficient  cause  is  the  merit  of  the  former  possessor  or 
the  demerit  of  the  thief.  The  non-combinative  cause  is  conjuuction  of 
such  a  vessel  with  soul  possessing  such  adristam  (or  results  of  actions- 
done  in  previous  states  of  existence)  ;  and  the  combinative  cause  is- 
such  a  vessel.  In  like  manner,  adristam  is  also  the  causa  of  the  attrac 
tion  towards  a  loadstone,  which  takes  place  in  needles,  i.  e.,  iron-rods,. 
when  in  proximity  with  the  magnet.  If  it  be  asked,  in  consequence  of 
whose  adristam  motion  takes  place  in  needles,  etc.,  the  reply,  is  that  it 
is  the  adristam  of  him  to  whom  benefit  or  injury  accrues  by  the  motion, 
that  is  the  cause.  The  term,'  needle/  is  indicative,  iro:i  in  general 
attracted  by  the  load-stone  being  inte  idel.  It  is  to  be  understood  that 
adristam  is  the  cause  of  the  motion  of  grass  attracted  by  that  which  is 
attractive  of  grass  (amber  ?),  of  the  upward  flaming  of  fire,  of  the  side 
ward  motion  of  air,  and  of  the  aotiou  of  the  ultimata  atoms  at  the 
beginning  of  creation. 

Plurality  of  action. 

Upaskdra  —  It  may  bo  doubted  whether  an  arrow,  a  bird,  a  wheel  of  burning  charcoal,  etc.,. 
have  only  one  action,  or  many,  till  they  come  to  a  stop.     To  remove  this  doubt,   he  says  : 


:  n  *  i  ?  i  ?$  u 


jq\  Isau,  of  the  arrow.  SinjTT^  Ayugapat, 

Samyoga-visesah,     peculiarities     of    co  iju  ictio  is.       ^r«fr:q?%      Karmma- 
anyatve,  in  respect  of  diversity  of  action.^:  Hetuh,  cause.     Mark 

16.     Peculiarities    of   non-simultaneous    conjunctions   of    the 
arrow,  are  the  mark  of  the  diversity  of  its  actioa.  —  195. 

In  '  isau  '  the  locative  inflection  has  bee  i  used  in  the  se:ise  of  the- 
genitive.  The  sense  of  the  aphorism  is  as  follows  :  After  conjunction 
with  a  wall  and  the  like,  of  an  arrow,  etc.,  moving  with  impetus,  a 
cessation  of  motion  is  observed,  even  though  the  arrow,  etc.,  still  exist;. 
Here  it  is  not  the  destruction  of  the  substratum  which  causes  the- 
destruction  of  the  motion,  for  the  substratum  continues  to  exist.  A  ly 
contradictory  attribute  is  also  not  observed.  It  is,  therefore,  inferrel. 
that  it  is  conjunction  produced  by  itself,  that  destroys  the  action.  And 
this  conjunction,  produced  at  the  fourth  moment,  destroys  action  of 
the  fifth  moment.  Thus,  first  there  is  production  of  action,  then  dis 
junction,  next  destruction  of  the  previous  conjunction,  after  it  sub 
sequent  conjunction,  and  lastly  destruction  of  action.  The  meaning, 
therefore,  is  that  peculiarities  of  non-simultaneous  conjunctions  make- 
known  the  diversity  of  the  action.  *  Saiayoga-viiesah  '  means- 


KANlDA   SftTRAS  V,  1,  17.  15& 

peculiarity  in  conjunction,  which  is  nothing  but  self-produced-ness. 
•Otherwise,  were  conjunction,  as  such,  destructive  of  action,  action 
could  not  abide  anywhere.  —  16. 

Action  produced  by  Samskara. 

Upaskdra.  —  After  the  section  on  Action  producible  by  impulse,  he    begins  the   section   on 
Action  producible  by  resultant  energy. 


K 


II  V,  I  \\  \\3  II 

Nodanat,    from    impulse  of  molecular  movement.  9TI^}  Adyam, 
original,  first,  %q\:  Isoh,  of  the  arrow.  *&*]  Karmma,  action.    dcijfcw 


Tat-karmma-karitat,  produced  by  that  action.  =5  Cha,  and.  fl'frftKT^  Sams- 
karat,  from  resultant  energy.  HrfT  Uttaram,  the  next.  <T«IT  Tatha,  simi 
larly.  SflT  Uttaram,  the  next.  Sfrf  Uttaram,  the  next.  ^  Cha,  and. 

17.  The  first  action  of  the  arrow  is  from  impulse  ;  the  next 
is  from  resultant  energy  produced  by  that  (i.e.,  the  first)  action  ; 
and  similarly  the  next,  and  the  next.—  197. 

Of  the  first  action,  which  is  produced  in  an  arrow,  when  discharged 
from  a  bowstring,  drawn  by  the  volition  of  a  person,  the  arrow  is  the 
combinative  cause,  volition  and  gravity  are  the  efficient  causes.  And 
by  this  first  action,  resultant  energy,  called  impetus,  and  having  the 
^ame  substratum,  is  produced,  it  is  proved  even  by  perception,  viz., 
"  It  (i.  e.,  the  arrow)  moves  with  velocity."  By  that  resultant  energy, 
action  is  produced  in  that  arrow  ;  of  which  the  non-combinative  cause 
is  the  resultant  energy,  the  combinative  cause  is  the  arrow,  while  the 
•efficient  cause  is  an  intense  form  of  molecular  movement.  In  like  man 
ner,  a  succession  of  actions  one  after  another  is  produced  by  the 
resultant  energy  which  continues  until  the  arrow  falls. 

Since,  on  an  action  being  destroyed  by  subsequent  conjunction 
produced  by  (the  action)  itself,  another  action  is  produced  by  resultant 
•energy,  therefore,  a  single  resultant  energy  only  is  productive  of  a 
succession  of  actions  ;  whereas,  on  the  ground  of  redundancy,  it  is  not 
proper  to  assume  a  succession  of  resultant  energy,  similar  to  the 
succession  of  actions.  To  point  out  this,  he  says  "  similarly  the  next, 
and  the  next,"  and  also  uses  the  singular  number  in  "  from  resultant 
•energy  produced  by  that  action."  In  the  Nyaya  doctrine,  however, 
'  which  admits  a  succession  of  resultant  energies  like  the  succession  of 
actions,  there  is  redundancy.  The  reason,  again,  that  of  two  arrows, 
simultaneously  discharged,  the  impetus  of  the  one  is  swift  and  that  of 
the  other  slow,  is  the  swiftness  andslownees  of  the  impulse  or  molecular 
movement.  —  17- 

Vivrtti.  —  The  original  action  itself  of  a  discharged  arrow,  etc., 
destroys,  at  the  third  moment  from  its  own  origin,  its  cause,  viz.t 
molecular  movement  or  impulse,  given  by  the  bow.  Therefore,  there 


VAlSESIKA   PHILOSOPHY. 


being  absence  of  impulse,  how  will  other  actions  be  produced  at  the 
fifth,  and  succeeding  moments  ?  In  view  of  this  objection,  he  states 
the  aphorism. 

Falling  of  arrow,  how  caused. 

Upa*kdra.--Svt  if  only  a  single  resultant  energy  be  productive  of  a  succession  of  actions 
there  would  be,  under  no  circumstances  whatever,  a  falling    of  the  arrow,  because  of   the 
the    resultant    energy    which    is    productive    of    aciton.  (To  this   objection,  he 


Saiiiskara-abhave,  in  the  absence    of    resultant  energy  (or 
propulsive  energy  generated  by  action).  p^T^  Gurutvat,  from  o-ravity. 
Patanam,  falling. 


18.     In  the  absence  of  propulsive  energy  generated  by  action, 
falling  (results)  from  gravity.  —  198. 

Gravity,  which  is  the  cause  of  falling,  invariably  follows  (the- 
arrow),  at  every  moment.  That  gravity,  being  counter-acted  by  resul 
tant  energ/,  could  not  cause  the  falling  (of  the  arrow;.  Now,  in  the- 
absence  of  the  counter-active,  the  very  same  gravity  causes  falling. 
This  is  the  meaning.  —  18. 

Here  ends  the  first    chapter  of   the    fifth    book    in    Sankara's  Com 
mentary  on  the  Yaiiesika  Aphorisms. 


KANiDA    SfiTRAS  V,  2,  2.  161 


BOOK  FIFTH—  CHAPTER  SECOND. 

Causea  of  action  in  Earth. 

Upatibira.  —  This  is  the  section  on  the  examination   of  Action  producible   by  impulse,  etc., 
Therein  he  says: 


Nodana-abhighatat,  from  molecular  movement  or  impulse, 
and  from  impact.  ^Tfi^^JlWC,  Saiiayukta-Saikyogat,  from  conjunction 
with  the  conjunct.  ^  Cba,  and.  ^fa^T  Prithivyam,  in  Earth.  sp,»*i  Kar- 
mina,  action. 

1.     Action  in  Earth  (results)  from  impulse,     impact,  and  con 
junction  with  the  conjunct.  —  199. 

^\\*f  is  a  particular  form  of  conjunction  :  conjunction,  action  pro 
duced  by  \\hich  does  not  Leccme  the  cause  of  the  disjunction  of  conjoint 
things  from  each  other  ;  or,  conjunction  which  does  not  become  the 
efficient  cause  of  Sound.  That  j  articular  form  of  conjunction  is  called 
impact,  \vhich  becomes  the  efficient  cause  of  Sound,  and  action  produced 
by  which  becomes  the  cause  of  disjunction  of  conjoint  things  Irom 
each  other.  By  each  cf  them  also  action  is  produced  in.  Earth  called 
clay.  In  Earth  action  is  produced  from  imrulse  given  by  the  foct,  as 
weil  as  from  the  impact  of  the  foot.  Here  clay  is  the  combinative 
cause  ;  impulse  and  impact  are  respectively  non-combinative  causes  ; 
gravity,  imj  etus,  and  volition  are,  so  far  as  they  are  necessary,  efficient 
causes.  "  From  conjunction  with  the  conjunct  :  "  Because  action  is 
simultaneously  observed  in  a  water-pot,  etc.,  lying  on  clay,  when  action 
is  produced  in  that  clay  from  impulse  or  from  impact.  —  1. 

Above  continued. 

l~  ],cn>l:«ra.  —  But    \\hat    is    the    non-combinative    caute    of  earthquake,   etc.,    which   take 
place  M  ithout  the  intervention  of  impulse  and  impact  ?     He  gives  the  answer  : 


^    ,     Jl  ^  I  R  I  R  II 

b,  that,  i.  e.,  action  in  Earth.  f^^^Jir  Visesena,  with  a  particu 
lar  consequence.  ^j^S^lfrcf  Adrista-karitam,  caused  by  adrisiam  or 
destiny. 

2.     (If  action    in    Earth    happens)    with    a    particular   conse 
quence,  it  is  caused  by  adristam. — 200. 

'  Tat  '  alludes  to  action  in  Earth.  Action  in  Earth  alone,  if  it 
happens  with  a  particular  consequence,  i.  e.,  under  the  tendency  (vdsand) 
of  transmigratory  souls  towards  birth,  life,  and  experience  (bhoga"),  is 
then  caused  by  adristam.  Therefore,  the  non-combinative  cause  of 
earthquake  is  conjunction  of  the  soul,  possessing  adristam,  of  a  person 
whose  pleasure  or  pain  is  produced  by  the  earthquake  ;  the  earth  is  the 
combinative  cause  ;  and  adristam  is  the  efficient  cause. 


162  VAI&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


'Or'  '  tat  '  alludes  to  impulse  and  impact.  i  Visasa.i  '  means  absence. 
So  that,  the  meaning  is,  action  in  Earth,  which  is  produced  in  the 
absence  of  impulse  and  impact,  is  caused  by  adl'istam.  —  2. 

JBhdsya.  —  explains  adrista  in  V.  ii.  2  in  the  sense  of  unseen  natural 
force,  the  causes  of  seismic  disturbances,  of  the  revolution  of  the  ter 
restrial  globe  round  the  sun,  and  of  other  actions  in  Earth. 

Cause  of  rain. 

Upaskdra.  —  Now,  in  the  section  on  the  examination  of  action  combined  with  fluid  (which 
includes  liquid)  substance,  he  says  : 


t  A  pain,    of    waters.  ^nTfiT^ra  Samyoga-abhave  ;  in   the  absence  of 
conjunction.  JT^rSTT^  Gurutvat,  from  gravity.  'TrFTflt  Patanam,  falling. 

3.     The  falling  of  waters,    in   the    absence  of   conjunction,  is 
due  to  gravity.  —  201. 

The  falling  of  waters,  in  the  form  of  a  shower,  is  caused  by  gravity, 
which  is  its  non-combinative  cause.  It  takes  place  in  the  absence  of 
conjunction,  *.  c.,  conjunction  with  the  cloud.  Therefore,  absence  of 
conjunction  is  the  efficient  cause.  This  is  the  meaning.  —  -3. 

Causes  of  flowing  of  ivater. 

Upaskdra.  —  But  how  is  action,  productive   of   mutual    conjunction    amongst  the  drops  of 
water  themselves,  produced  ?     He  gives  the  answer. 


Dravatvat,  from  fluidity.  ^Tr^rq  Syandanam,  flowing. 
4.     Flowing  (results)  from  Hudity.  —  202- 

By  the  mutual  conjunction  of  drops  of  water  fallen  on  earth,  a 
large  body  of  water,  in  the  form  of  a  stream,  is  produced.  And  the 
flowing  or  distant  progression,  which  takes  place-  in  it,  is  produced 
from  fluidity  as  its  non-combinative  cause,  and  from  gravity  as  its 
efficient  cause,  in  water  drops  which  are  its  combinative  causes  —  4. 

Cause  of  evapc  ration  of  water. 

Upaskdra.  —  But  the  falling  in  rain,  due  to  gravity,  would  be   po&sible,    if  water  lying  on 
earth  went  up.     But  how  does  this  take  place  ?     fe'o  he  says  : 


Nadyah,  the  sun's  rays.  ^r^^TTr^Vayu-saKiyogat,  through  con 
junction  with  air.  3Tntr?<!IflC  Arohanam,   ascent. 

5.     The  sun's  rays    (cause)    the    ascent    (of    water),    through 
•conjunction  with  air.  —  203. 

The  word,  '  cause  '  (verb),  is  the  complement  of  the    aphorism.  The 
rays  of  the  sun  cause  the  going  up  of  water,  through  conjunction  with  air. 


KANADA  StTTKAS  V,  2,7.  163 

In  the  summer,  the  sun's  rays,     being    impelled    "by    air,    cause    the 
ascent  of  water.     This  is  the  meaning. 


Where  the  reading  is    Tlg^l3S'qVlffi(.  there  it  should  be   interpreted 
as  conjunction  with  air  related  to  the  sun's  rays.  —  5. 

Cause  of  evaporation  of  water,  continued. 

Upaskt'tra.  —  But  how  do  the  sun's  rays  come  to   possess    such    power    that   they   carry  up 
water  lying  on  the  earth  ?     Hence  he  says. 


—  Nodana-apidanat,  from  concussion,  or  being  violently 
shaken  by  or  through  the  impulse.  sfgflsf^TJTT^  Saihyukta-samyogat, 
from  conjunction  with  the  conjunct.  ^  Cha,  and. 

6.  (Particles  of  water  fly  upwards),  by  means  of  concussion 
with  impulse,  and  of  conjunction  with  the  conjunct.  —  204.  . 

Particles  of  water  fly  up,  being  conjoined  with  the  sun's  rays, 
which  are,  in  turn,  conjoined  with  air,  through  concussion  with  the 
imj  ulse  of  strong  wind  ;  in  the  same  way  as  the  rays  of  fire,  bestirred 
by  air,  carry  up  particles  of  water  boiling  in  a  cauldron.  The  word 
'  cha'  conveys  the  sense  of  '  as.'  And  here  only  particles  of  water 
boiling  in  a  cauldron  should  be  observed  to  be  the  simile.  —  6. 

NOTE  :  Upaskdra  compares  the  two  processes  of  evaporation  and 
ebullition  of  water 

Cause  of  circulation  of  water  in  trees. 

Upasl'ura.  —  Water  peured  at  the  root,  gots  up  in  all  directions,  through  the  interior  of 
a  tree.  Neither  impulse  and  impact,  nor  the  sun's  rays  prevail  there.  How,  then,  is  it 
caused  ?  He  gives  the  answer. 


II  *  I  R  I  V9  II 

qOT   Vriksa-abhisarpanam,    circulation  in  trees,    ff^  Iti,  this. 
Adrista-karitaro,  caused  by  adfistam  or  destiny. 

7.     The  circulation  (of  water)  in  trees  is  caused   by  adristam. 
—205. 

1  Abhisarpanam  '  means  flowing  towards  oV  all  over.  That  takes 
place  in  a  tree,  of  water  poured  at  its  root.  It  is  caused  by  adristam,  i.  e.f 
of  those  souls  whose  pleasure  or  pain  is  produced  by  the  growth  of  the 
leaves,  branches,  fruits,  flowers,  etc.  The  meaning,  then,  is  that  action 
by  which  water  rises  up  and  causes  the  growth  of  trees,  arises  from 
conjunction  with  the  above-mentioned  souls,  possessing  adfistam,  as 
its  n  on-  combinative  cause,  and  from  adfistam,  as  its  efficient  cause,  in. 
water  which  is  its  combinative  cause.  —  7. 

Cause  of  condensation  and  dissolution  of  water. 

Upaxkara.  —  Constitutional  fluidity  has  been  stated  to  be  the  characteristic  of  water. 
Upward,  downward,  and  sideward  motion  of  such  water  only  has  been  proved.  The  aqueous- 
ness  of  snow,  hail,  etc.,  also  are  proved  without  a  dispute,  since  they  possess  coldness.  There 
fore,  how  do  these  possess  condensation,  i.  e.,  hardness,  and  how  dissolution  ?  Hence 
i\e  says. 


164  VAI&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY 


TT  Apara,  of  waters.  ^-fHT:  Sanghatah,  condensation,  fr^ppf  Vilaya 
nam,  dissolution.  ^  Cha,  and.  ^3T:*f<ffmt  Tejah-sarkyogU,  from  conjunc 
tion  with  fire. 

8.     Condensation,  and  dissolution,  of  water,  are    due    to    con 
junction  with  fire.  —  206. 

Aqueous  ultimate  atoms,    originating  a    binary    atomic    ao-aieo-ate 
in  consequence  of    being    impeded  by    celestial    fire,    do    not    originate 

fluidity  in  these  binary  atomic  aggregates.  Snow,  hail,  etc,  void  of 
fluidity,  are  thus  originated,  in  the  course  of  binary  and  others  atomic 
aggregates,  by  constituent  {.arts  void  of  fluidity.  Therefore  hard  iess 
is  observed  in  them. 

Such  being  the  case,  it  may  be  asked,  what  proof  is  there  that  s  iow 
hail,  etc.,  are     modifications  of    water  V     Accordingly  it   has  bea  i  said' 
Dissolution    also    from    conjunction    with    fire."  °By  a  more  powerful 
conjunction  with  fire,  aotion  is  produced  in  the  ultimate  atoms   oricrjlia-" 
tive    of    s:io\v,     hail,    etc.     Action     produces     disjunction.     Froin°  the 
successive     destruction  thereby   of  originative  conjunctions  follows  the 
destruction  of  the   larger  compounds,  snow,    hail,    etc.     In  consequence 
of  the      departure    therefrom  of    conjunction    with  fire,    which    was    aa 
impediment  to  fluidity,  the  very  same  ultimate   atoms   originate  fluidity 
in  binary     atomic  aggregates;  whence  dissolution     takes  place  of  s  lovv 
hail,  etc.,  thus  endowed  with  fluidity.     Here  also  the  subsequent  ingress 
of  a  more  powerful  fire  is  the  efficient   cause.  —  -8. 


xplils  up  V.  ii.  8  into  two  aphorisms,  viz.,  Apdm  San  jhdtak 
and   vilayanclia  tejah 


Above  continued. 

UpaskAra.—  But  what  is  the  proof  that  thare  i*  sub.^iuent  in  jrojs  into  \v-ii  v  of  a  m  ,rn 
powerful  nro  present  in  other  ?  So  he  says  : 

I  ^  I  R  |  8.  II 

Tatra,  there,  i.  e.,  in    the    case  of   the    ingress  of   fire  into  water." 
^  Visphurjjathuh,  the  pealing  of  thunder.    fafflC    Lingam,    mark. 
9.     The  pealing  of  thunder  is  the  mark  of  that.—  207. 

1  Tatra/  i.  e.,  in  the  matter  of  the  subsequent  ingress  of  fire,  present 
in  ether,  into  water  floating  in  ether,  '  visphurjjathuh  lingam/i.e.  the 
pealing  of  thunder  itself  is  the  mark.  This  is  the  meaning.  Par-reach 
ing  flash  of  lightning  is  clearly  perceptible  ;  thunder  which  iirnndiate- 
ly  follows  it,  is  also  really  perceptible.  By  this  it  is  inferred  that  fire 
present  in  ether,  in  the  form  of  lightning,  has  entered  into  the  cloui 
from  which  hailstones  appear.  By  its  presence,  as  a  condition,  irn  >edi- 
ment  is  caused  to  the  fluidity  of  water-particles  originative  of  hail 
stones.  —  9 


S&TRAS  V,  2,  12.  165 


Cause  of  condensation  of  water,  continued. 
Upaskdra.  —  Of  this  he  gives  yet  another  proof  . 


r  u  *  i  R  i  ?on 

T  Vaidikam,  Vedic,  Derived  from  Veda.  =g  Cha  and. 
10.     (There  is)  Vedic  (proof)  also.—  208. 

The  meaning  is  that  the  ingress  of  fire    into  water  is  proved  by  the 
Veda  also.     Thus  :  — 


"  Those  waters  held  fire  in    their  womb,    which    held    fire    in    their 
•svomb,"  etc.  —  10. 

Cause  of  thundering  . 

Upaskdra.  —  But  how    is   thundering  produced,  since  conjunction  and  disjunction,  which 
are  the  causes  of  Sound,  are  not  observed  ?     Hence  he  says  : 


i  R  i  ? 

Apum,  of  waters.  S'qtJTT^   Samyogat,    from     conjunction,  . 

Vibhagat,  from  disjunction.  ^  Cha,  and.    ^crTft?%r:  Stanayitnoh.  of  cloud. 

11.     (Thunder-clap  results)   from    conjunction    with,    and    dis 
junction  from,  water,  of  the  cloud.  —  209. 

"  Visphuvjjathuh  "  is  the  complement  of  the  aphorism.  Conjunction 
with,  and  disjunction  from,  water,  of  the  cloud,  by  becoming  efficient 
causes,  produce  sound,  i.  e.,  thundering,  in  ether  as  the  combinative 
cause,  through  the  conjunction  of  the  cloud  itself  with  ether,  as  the 
non-combinative  cause.  Sometimes,  again,  conjunction  with,  and  dis 
junction  from,  air,  of  the  cloud,  are  the  efficient  causes,  and  conjunc 
tion  of  the  cloud  with  ether,  and  its  disjunction  therefrom,  are  the 
non-combinative  causes.  This  is  collaterally  mentioned  in  the  topic  of 
the  causes  of  action.  Or,  since  action  is  the  leading  topic  here,  it  is 
indicated  that,  conjunction  of  the  cloud  and  ether,  or  their  disjunc 
tion,  being  the  non-combinative  cause  of  sound,  the  (efficient)  cause  is 
action  produced  from  the  impulse  and  impact  of  water  alone  —  11. 

Vivriti-  —  Thundering  takes  place  from  the  conjunction  of  water, 
i.  e.,  from  the  impact  of  air  with  it,  and  from  its  disjunction  from  the 
cloud. 

Causes  of  conflagration,  tempest,  etc. 

UpasMra.  —  It  has  been  stated  that  conjunction  with  soul  possession  adristam  is  a  eauso 
of  earth-quake.  A;  there,  so  in  the  case  of  the  action  which  is  produced  in  fire  which  causes 
sudden  conflagration,  and  in  air  which  eausos  a  sudden  agitation  uf  trees  and  the  like  con 
junction  with  soul  possessing  adristam  is  also  the  non-combinative  cause  ;  air  and  tiro  are  tha 
.combinative  causes  ;  and  adristam  is  the  efficient  cause.  This  is  the  meaning. 


II  V*  I  R  I 


166  VAlgESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


n  Prithivi-karmmana,  by  the  action  of  Earth.  ?HT:^wr  Tejah- 
karmma,  action  of  fire,  sn^wf  Vayu-karmma,  action  of  air.  =g  Clia,  and 
Vyakhyatam,  explained. 


12.     The    action  of   Fire,  and  the  action  of  Air  are  explained 
by  the  action  of  Earth.  —  210. 

The  twice  recurrence  of  the  word  action  in    the    aphorism,    has  the 
object  of  indicating  the  action  of  meteors,  etc.  —  12. 

Causes  of  initial  action  of  fire,  air,  atoms,  and  mind. 

Upskdra.  —  Ho  mentions  other  actions  of  which  conjunction  with  soul  possessirg  ailrixtam 
s  the  non-combinative  cause. 


%:  Agneh,  of  fire.  3^33^1  sf  Urddhva-jvalanaiii,  flaming  upward. 
:  Vayoh,  of  air.  faafoTiryyak,  sideward.  T^  Pavan  am,  blowing.  INg»rj 
Anunam,  of  atoms,  JTT^r:  Manasah.  of  inind.  ^  Cha,  and.  ^fr^4  Adyam, 
initial,  first.  q;»»|  Karmma,  action.  *%%%  ^TT^rTq  Adrista-karitam,  caused  by 
adristam. 

13.  The  initial  upward  flaming  of  fire,  the  initial  sideward 
blowing  of  air,  and  the  initial  actions  of  atoms,  and  of  mind  are 
caused  by  adristam.  —  211. 

'  Adyam'  means  contemporaneous  with,  or  existing  at,  the  beginn 
ing  of  creation.  At  that  stage,  impulse,  impact,  etc.,  being  non-existent. 
conjunction  with  soul  possessing  adristatii  is  in  these  cases  the  non- 
combinative  cause.  The  adjective,  '  initial,'  qualifies  upward  flaming, 
and  sideward  blowing  also.  It  is  proper  to  hold  that  impetus  is  the 
non-combinative  cause  of  other  (than  initial)  actions  of  fire  and  air, 
for  there  being  a  visible  or  known  cause  there  is  no  occasion  for  the- 
supposition  of  an  invisible  or  unknown  cause  —  13. 

Cause  of  action  of  mind. 
Upaskdra.  —  With  reference  to  non-initial  action,  he  says  : 


r     Hasta-karmmana,    by     the     action      of    the    hand. 
Manasah    of    mind  or  the  internal  organ.  ^FFJ  karmma,  action.    s^f- 
Vyakhyatam,  explained. 

14.     The  action  of  mind  is    explaind    by    the    action   of   the 
hand.—  212. 

As  in  the  throwing  upward,  etc.,  of  the  pestle,  the  action  of  the- 
hand  has  for  its  non-combinative  cause  conjunction  with  soul  exercis 
ing  volition,  so  the  action  of  the  mind  also,  for  the  purpose  of  coming' 


KANADA  StTTRAS  III,  2,  12.  167 


into  contact  with  the  (external)  sense  receptive  of  the  object  desired, 
really  has  for  its  nou-corabi native  cause  conjunction  with  soul  exercis 
ing  volition.  Although  mind,  the  sense,  is  not  directly  subject  to 
volition,  still  it  should  be  observed  that  action  is  produced  in  mind  by 
volition  which  can  be  reached  by  the  nervous  process  by  which  mind 
travels.  That  the  nervous  process  can  be  apprehended  by  the  tactual 
sense-organ,  however,  must  be  admitted  ;  for,  otherwise,  assimilation 
of  food,  drink,  etc.,  also  will  not  be  possible  by  volition  which  can  be 
reached  by  the  nervous  process  through  which  life  or  the  vital  energy 
travels. — 14. 

Pleasure  and  pain  are  marks  of  action  of  mind. 

UpasMra. — But,  it  may  be   objected,  there  is    no  proof   that   action   is   produced   in   the 
.•mind.     Hence  he  says  : 


II 

1^  Atma-indriya-manah-artha-sannikarsfit,  from 
contact  of  soul,  sense,  mind,  and  object.  g<Sf:^  Sukha-duhkhe,  pleasure 
and  pain. 

15.     Pleasure  and  pain  (results)  from  contact    of    soul,    sense, 
mind,  and  object. — 213. 

'  Pleasure  and  pain  '  is  indicative  ;  cognition,  volition,  etc.,  are  to 
he  understood.  The  universality  or  ubiquity  of  mind  has  been  already 
refuted  and  its  atom-ness  established.  It  has  also  been  stated  that  the 
non-production  of  cognitions  simultaneously  is  the  mark  of  mind. 
There  could,  therefore,  be  no  pleasure  and  pain  at  all,  without  the  con 
junction  of  mind  with  the  respective  localities  of  the  senses.  The  mean 
ing  is  that,  did  no  action  take  place  in  mind,  there  could  be  no  feeling  in 
-the  form  of  "  Pleasure  in  my  foot,"  "Pain  in  ray  head,"  etc.  Although 
all  the  particular  attributes  of  the  soul  depend  upon  contact  of  mind,  yet 
pleasure  and  pain  are  (alone  expressly)  mentioned*,  because,  on  account 
of  their  intensity,  they  are  very  manifest. — 15. 

Yoga  described. 

Ifpaskdra. — Well,  if  the  mind  is  so  fickle  or  restless,  then  there  being  no  inhibition  or 
restraint  of  the  internal  organ  there  can  bo  no  ycga  or  communion,  and  without  yoga  there 
jan  be  no  intuitive  knowledge  of  the  soul,  and  without  it,  there  can  be  no  moksa  or  salvation, 
Therefore,  the  undertaking  of  this  treatise  is  futile.  In  anticipation  of  this  objection 
he  says  : 

$ 
I  1  I  ^  II 

Tat-anarambhah,    non-origination    of    that,  i.  e.,    pleasure 
.and  pain,  or  action  of  mind.  ?TTr*T$f  Atrnasthe,    steady  in   the  soul.    JfTf^T 
ananasi,  mind  being.    SETTta^   Sarirasya,  of    body,  i.  e.,    of    the    embodied 
;-soul.    5:^1^3":  duhkha-abhavah,   non-existence  of    pain.  ^  Sah,  that* 
Yogah,  yoga,  communion. 


168  VAI&ESIKA    PHILOSOPHY. 


16.  Non-origination  of  that  (follows)  on  the  mind  becoming 
steady  in  the  soul  ;  (after  it,  there  is)  non-existence  of  pain  in  the 
embodied  soul.  (This  is)  that  yoga.—  214. 

When  the  mind  of  an  indifferent  person  who  has  come  to  believe  in 
the  vanity  of  all  objects  of  enjoyment,  comes  to  stay  only  in  the  soul  at 
that  stage,  owing  to  the  absence  of  volition  corresponding  to  its  action 
action  is  not  produced  in  the  mind  which  then  becomes  comparatively 
steady.  It  is  this  (state)  which  is  (called)  yoga,  since  the  characteristic 
I  yoga  is  the  inhibition  or  restraint  of  the  internal  organ,  chittam. 

1  Tat-anarambhah,    means  non-origination    of  action  of   mind.     Or 
by   the    word,    Hat/    only    pleasure  and  pain  are    denoted,  being  in  the* 
context.     <  Duhkha-abhavah'  ;  Being  the  means    of  the  non-existence  of 
pain,    Yoga    itself  is    (spoken    of    as)    non-existence  of    pain     as  is    the 
expression  "  Food  is  life."     Or,  it  is    a  relative    compound    word  mean 
ing  where  there    is  non-existence    of  pain,     'garirasya'    means  the  soul 
as    limited    or    determined  by  the  body.     'Sah  yogah'  :  here    the    word 
1  that  /  refers  to  a  universally    known  object,"  (the    meaning  bein^  this 
is  that   Yoga. 

Or,  by  the  word,  '  fitma,'  life  is  here  denoted  by  transference  since 
soul  is  inferred  by  life.  So  that,  by  action  in  the  nervous  process 
which  is  the  channel  of  tho  life  breath,  action  of  the  life  breath 
(respiration  ),  is  also  produced.  Or,  the  action  of  the  life  breath  has  for 
its  non-combinative  cause,  conjunction  of  the  life-breath  with  soul 
exercising  volition  the  source  of  vitality.  And  volition,  which  is  the 
source  of  vitality,  is  supersensible,  and  has  to  be  inferred  by  the 
movement  of  the  life-breath.  Otherwise,  ho\v  can  there  be  inspiration 
of  air,  even  in  the  state  of  deep  sleep  ?  This  is  the  import  _  16 


i.—1  Atmasthe  manasi,'  i.  e.,  when,  quitting  the  senses,  etc. 
in  virtue  of  tho  six-limbed  Yoya,  mind  abides  in  the  soul  alone,  then'' 
<  tat-anarambhah,'  i.  e.,  '  anarambhah  '  or  non-production  of  action  of 
mind.  The  mind  then  becomes  fixed  or  steady.  In  this  state,  'Sarlrasya- 
duhkha-abhavah,'  i.  e.,  pain  in  relation  to  tho  body  is  not  produced. 
'  Sah,'  i.  e.,  conjunction  of  mind,  resiling  from  the  outside,  with  soul' 
is  called  Yoya. 

The  following  verses  of  Skandapurdnam  also  prove  the   same  thino-  ; 


i  t 

"  So  also,  (i'.  e.  restkss)  is  Chitta,  (i.  e.,  the  internal  organ),  smitten 
with  air.  Therefore,  do  not  trust  it  Accordingly;  restrain  air,  for  the- 
purpose  of  steadiness  of  Chitta.  For  the  purpose  of  restraining  air, 
practise  Yoga,  of  which  there  are  six  angaa  or  limbs.  Posture,  Regula 
tion  of  breath,  Abstraction  or  Inhibition  of  the  senses,  Concentration 
of  mind,  Meditation,  and  Absorption,  —  these  are  the  six  anyas  or 
limbs  of  Yoga  or  communion.0 


KANiDA  SftTRAS  V,  2,  17.  169 

Therefore,  there  being  cessation  of  false  knowledge,  etc.,  brought 
about  by  the  manifestation  of  intuitive  knowledge  of  soul,  after  the 
attainment  of  Yoga,  final  emancipation  remains  unimpeded.  Conse 
quently  a  system  of  thinking  about  things  (like  Kandda  Stttras}  is  not 
fruitless.  This  is  the  import. 

Other  actions  of  mind,  etc.  independent  of  volition, 
and  dependent  on  adristam. 

Upnskdra. — But,  if  volition  were  the  efficient  cause  of  the  action  of  life  and  mind,  then, 
when  life  and  mind  go  out  from  the  body,  in  the  state  of  death,  and,  on  the  production  of 
another  body,  re-enter  into  it,  there  being  no  volition,  both  the.^e  actions  would  ba  impossible. 
How,  again,  can  be  produced  action,  productive  of  conjunction  of  even  what  is  eaten  and 
drunk,  i.  e.,  food  and  drink,  which  conjunction  is  the  cause  of  the  growth  of  the  body  and  its 
limb*, 'as  well  as  action  %vhich  causes  conjunction  and  disjunction  during  life  within  the 
womb  ?  In  anticipation  of  this  objection,  he  says  : 


n  *  i  i  i 

far  Apasarpanam,  going  out,  egress.  gr<T?T*T<f?n;  Upasarpanam,  com 
ing  into,  ingress.  ^ri^rnfa^frTT:  Asita-pita-samyogah,  conjunctions  of 
what  is  eaten  and  drunk.  ^T^fcdMJMlTI1  Karyya-antara-samyogah,  con 
junctions  of  other  effects  or  products.  =5  Cha,  and.  ^Tfg^ni^Trfr  Adrista- 
karitfi'ii,  caused  by  adfistam. 

17.  Egress  and  ingress  (of  life  and  mind,  from  and  into, 
body),  conjunctions  (i.e.,  assimilation)  of  food  and  drink,  and  con 
junctions  of  other  products, — these  are  caused  by  adristam. — 215. 

Here  the  neuter  gender  in  the  word  '  adrista-kiiritani  '  is  according 
to  the  rule  that  word  of  the  neuter  gender,  appearing  together  with  a 
word  of  another  gender,  may  optionally  entail  neuter  gender  in  both. 
The  word,  '  Samyoga/  again,  secondarily  denotes  action  which  is  its 
cause.  l  Apasarpanam/  i.  e.,  the  going  out  of  life  and  mind  from  the 
body  alone,  on  the  wearing  away  of  action  which  originated  the  body  ; 
*•  Upasarpanam/  i.  e.,  the  entrance  of  life  and  mind  into  another  body 
as  it  is  produced  ;  action  which  is  the  cause  of  the  conjunction  (i.  e.f 
assimilation)  of  food,  drink,  etc.  ;  and  action  which  is  the  cause  of  the 
conjunction  (i.  e.,  pulsation,  etc.)  of  another  product,  i.  e,,  the  foetus  ; — 
all  these  have  as  their  non-combinative  cause  conjunction  with  soul 
possessing  adTistam.  The  word,  '  iti/  implies  that  the  actions  of  the 
humours  and  excreta  of  the  body  are  also  caused  by  conjunction  with, 
soul  possessing  adristam,  as  their  non-combinative  cause. — 17. 

Vivriti- — He  mentions  other  actions  dependent  on  adTistam. 

'  Apasarpanam/  i.  e.,  egress  of  mind  from  the  body  at  death  ;  (  Upa 
sarpanam,'  i.  e.,  the  ingress  of  mind  into  another  body  when  it  is  pro 
duced  ;  action  from  which  conjunctions  of  what  is  eaten  and  drunk, 
i.  e.,  food  and  water,  are  produced  ;  action  from  which  conjunctions  of 
other  effects,  i.  e.,  the  senses  and  life,  with  the  body,  are  produced  : — all 
these  are  caused  by  conjunction  with  soul  possessing  adristam,  as  th& 
non-combinative  cause. 


170  VAI£ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

Moksa  described. 

Upattkdra.  —  But,  it  may  be  urged,  if  the  production  of  another  |body  were  necessary,  how| 
-would  there  be  Moksa  ?     Hence  he  says  ; 


Tat-abhave,  in  the  non-existence  of  that,  i.  e.,  the  causal  body, 
or  potential  body,  or  the  subtle  body  of  impressions  and  tendencies, 
acquired  during  life,  which  becomes  the  cause  of  re-birth,  and  in  re 
birth,  becomes  encased,  as  it  were,,  in  the  gross,  physical  body.  5f4tTT*n^: 
Samyoga-abhavah,  non-existence  of  conjunction,  i.  e.,  with  the  existing 
physical  bodv.  ?THTiHfe:  A-pradurbhavah,  non-re-appearanco,  or  non-re 
birth.  «g  Cha,  and.  in^f:  Moksah,  salvation.  Moksa. 

18.  Moksa  consists  in  the  non-existence  of  conjunction  with 
the  body,  when  there  is  at  the  same  time,  no  potential  body  exist 
ing,  and  consequently,  re-birth  cannot  take  place.  —  216. 

Here  the  idea  is  as  follows:  The  power  of  Yoya  produces  intui 
tive  knowledge  of  the  self  ;  false  knowledge,  attended  with  desire,  is 
thereby  annihilated  ;  consequently,  attraction,  aversion,  stupidity  or 
irrationality  or  spiritual  blindness  (moha"),  and  other  faults  due  to  it, 
disappear  ;  then  inclination  or  activity  goes  away  ;  birth,  due  to  it, 
therefore,  does  not  take  place  ;  and,  consequently,  pain,  bound  up  with 
birth,  also  vanishes  away.  This,  then,  is  the  nature  of  things.  Now, 
in  virtue  of  the  power  born  of  yoya,  a  yoyin,  considering  the  entire 
mass  of  virtues  and  vices,  or  merits  and  demerits,  which  are  the  un 
common  or  particular  causes  of  pleasure  and  pain  to  be  enjoyed,  at 
particular  places  and  times,  in  the  bodies  of  a  horse,  an  elephant,  a 
serpent,  a  bird,  etc.,  in  accordance  with  those  merits  and  demerits,  and 
then  going  through  those  several  forms  of  physical  existence,  thereby 
wears  away  or  exhausts  his  previously  produced  merits  and  demerits 
by  experiencing  them.  His  faults  being  thus  neutralised,  when  other 
merits  and  demerits  are  not  produced,  and  when  there  is  in  coi.  sequence 
no  production  of  another  future  or  potential  body,  at  that  time,  it 
is  the  non-existeuce  of  conjunction,  which  then  exists,  with  the 
former  body,  that  is  (called)  moksa.  '  Tat-abhave  '  means  in  the  absence 
of  conjunction,  in  the  non-production  of  a  future  body. 

To  meet  the  objection  that  this  state  is  common  to  all  at  pralaya, 
or  periodical  dissolution  of  creation,  he  adds  '  apradurbhavah.  The 
meaning  is,  after  which  manifestation  of  body,  etc.,  does  not  again 
take  place.  '  Sah  moksah  :'  that  is,  annihilation  of  pain,  which  results 
in  that  state,  is  Moksa.  —  18. 

VivTiti.  _  It  may  be  objected  that  the  stream  of  bodies  being  with 
out  beginning  and  without  end,  the  impossibility  of  emancipation  is 
also  the  same.  Hence  he  says  : 

'  Tat-abhave/  i.  e.,  in  the  absence  of  adristam,  that  is  to  say,  where 
future  adristam  is  exhausted  by  intuitive  knowledge  of  self,  and  existing 
adristam,  by  experience,  bhoga  ;  '  samyoga-abhavah.'  i.  e.,  a  severance 


KANADA  StiTRAS  V.  2.  20.  171 

takes  place  from  connection  with  the  stream  or  succession  of 
bodies  ;  following  it,  is  '  apradurbhavah  ;  i.  e.,  non-production  of  pain, 
since  the  causes,  viz.,  body  andfadristam,  do  not  exist.  It  is  then  and 
there  that  emancipation  becomes  possible.  Therefore,  emancipation  is 
notichimerical  like  the  horns  of  a  hare.  This  is  the  import. 

Darkaess  is  non-existence. 

Upaskdra.  —  It  may  be  objected  :  —  The  action  of  a  substanca  is  observed  also  in  darkness^ 
there  being  the  perception,  "  The  shadow  moves."  Here  there  is  no  volition,  no  impulse  or 
impact,  no  gravity  or  fluidity,  no  resultant  energy.  Therefore,  another  efficient  cause  should 
be  enumerated  ;  but  it  does  not  fall  within  observation.  Accordingly  he  says  : 


t  II  <i  I  ^  I  33.  H 


because    of    difference   in    production    from    Substance,  Attribute,  and 
Action.  ?PTT^:  Abhavah,  non-being,  non-existence.  rR:Tamah,   darkness. 

19.     Darkness  is  non-existence,   because  it    is    different  in    its 
production  from  Substance,  Attribute,  and  Action.  —  217. 

By  this  aphorism,  the  determination  or  delimitation  that  substances. 
are  nine  only,  also  becomes  established. 

Now,  the  production  of  substance  is  dependent  upon  substance* 
possessing  touch  ;  but  in  darkness,  touch  is  not  felt.  It  cannot  be  that 
touch  is  only  undeveloped  here  ,  for  development  of  touch  is  essential 
to  development  of  colour. 

Objection.  —  This  is  the  rule  in  case  of  Earth,  whereas  darkness  is 
the  tenth  substance. 

Answer.  —  It  is  not-  For  no  other  substance  is  substratum  of  blue 
colour,  and  gravity  is  inseparable  from  blue  colour,  as  also  are  taste 
and  smell. 

Objection.  —  As  sound  is  the  only  distinguishing  attribute  of  Ether,. 
so  also  will  blue  colour  be  the  only  distinguishing  attribute  of  dark 
ness. 

Answer.  —  It  is  not  so,  as  there  is  contradiction  to  its  visibility.  For, 
if  darkness  were  something  possessing  blue  colour,  or  were  it  blue* 
colour  itself,  then  it  would  not  be  perceived  by  the  eye  without  the  help 
of  external  light.  —  19. 

Above  continued. 

Upaskdra.  —  What,  then,  causes  the  'perception   of  motion  (in  darkness)  ?     Ho  giv«  th» 
Answer  : 

II  H*  I  <  I  **  II 


:  Tejasah,  of  light.  jfiqi-flMl  Dravya-antarena,  by    another   subs 
tance.  wnTOR^  Avaranat,  because  of  obscuration.  <9  Cha,  and  also. 

20.     (Darkness  is  non-existence),  also  because  (it  is  produced) 
from  the  obscuration  of  light  by  another  substance.  —  218. 


172  VAI&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


Light  being  obscured  by    another  moving  substance,    non-existence 
of  light  is  not   observed    in  the  places    falling    behind,  and  is    observed 
n    the    places    lying    before.      It  is  from    this    resemblance  of   the  nou- 
xistence  of  light    to  the  moving    substance,    that,    motion    is    mistake  i 
in  it,  but  not  that  motion  is  real  in  it.     This  is  the  meaning,  the  -.orcep 
tion     appearing    so  (i.  e.,    erroneous)    from    agreement    and    diffjre     >j 
(That  is,  whenever   a  body  in    motion  obscures  light,  the  shad  ,\v  caused 
thereby    also    moves  ;  and  where  the    obscuring  body  is    not    iu  nntiou 
the  shadow  also  does  not  move). 

Darkness,  (then),  is  non-e-iste  ice  of  every  trace  of  light  possessing 
developed  or  appreciable  colour.  —  -2J. 

Space,  Time,    Ether,  and  Soul  are  void  of  action. 

Upasktra.—  Having    thus   finished  the    parenthetical    action    on  darkness,  in  two  aph  iri- 
srm,  ho  bo^m.s  t  10  section  on  voiati3ss  of  aoti  m  : 


Dik-kalau,  space  a-id  time,  srr^rtf  Akasam,  ether.  ^  Clia, 
and  also.  ftarra^NcRlfet  Kriyavat-vaidharmmyat,  because  of  difference 
from  that  which  possesses  activity.  fM^lffar  Niskriyani,  inactive. 

Space,  Time,  and  also    Ether    are    inactive,    because    of 
their  difference  from  that  which  possesses  activity.  _  219. 

The  word  '  Cha  '  brings  in  the  soul.  Difference  from  that  which 
possesses  activity  lies  in  the  imponderable  less  or  incorporiety  of 
space,  etc.,  for  activity  always  accompanies  cjrpoi-eity  or  form.  __  21  . 

Action,  Attribute,  Genus,  Species,  and  Combination  are  v)id  of  action. 
Upaskara.  —  Ho  points  out  the  inactivity  of    actions  and  attributes  : 


H  *  i  R  i  RR  n 


!$••*  Etena,  by  this.  ^n=ir!ftl  Karmmaui,  actions.  JTqjT:  Grunah,  attributes. 
^  Cha,  and.  s^T^FTf:  Vyakhyatah,  explained. 

22.     By  this,    Actions   and    Attributes    are    explained  (as  in 
active).—  220, 

'  Etena  '  means  by  difference  from  that  which  possesses  activity. 
Difference  from  that  which  possesses  activity,  in  other  words,  in- 
corporeity  or  imponderableness,  belongs  to  attribute  and  action.  They 
are,  therefore,  explained  to  be  inactive.  —  22. 


'iti;  —  The  worfl  '  Oka  '  implies  Grenus,  etc. 
Combination  has  no  beginning,  and  so  is  independent  of  action. 


a.-^L^  may  be  urged  :  —  If  attribute  and  action  are   inactive,  how  then    can  there 
be  relation  of  substance  with   them  ?  Connection  by  conjunction   may    be   possible  ;  but   that- 
is  dependent  upon  action.     Hence  he  says  : 


wrenr*  *p*  g:  iru*  i  R  i  %   u 


KAN  ADA  StTTRAS  V,  2,  25.  173 


j  Niskriyanaih,  of  the  inactive,  ^*r=nJj:  Samavayah,  com 
bination.  ^Rp:q:  Karmmabhyah,  from  actions.  f%f^«  Nisiddhah, 
excluded,  beyond,  independent. 

23.     (The  relation)  of  the  inactive  (i.e.,  Attribute  and  Action), 
(to  Substance),  is  Combination,   (which  is)  independent  of  actions. 

—221. 

It  is  combination  which  is  the  relation  of  attributes  and  actions 
(to  substance;.  It  is  excluded  from  actions.  The  meaning  is  that  this 
relation,  i.  e.,  combination,  has  no  production  even,  and  that  its  depen 
dency  upon  action,  therefore,  remains  at  a  long  distance.  —  23. 

Attributes  are  non-combinative  causes. 

Upaskara.  —  It  may  bo  objected  :  If  attributes,  bain  ;  impondjrable,  are  nob  the  combina 
tive  causes  of  action,  then  how  are  attributes  and  actions  produced  by  attributes  ?  For 
causality,  save  and  except  in  the  form  of  combinative  icausality,  is  not  possible.  To  moot 
this  objection,  ho  says  : 


-  II  *  I  *  I 

Karanaih,    cause.  §  Tu,    however.    ?RT*T5fTft*tt    A-sainavayinah, 
non-combinative.  JTOn:  Grunah,  attributes. 

24.     Attributes  are,  however,  non-combinative  causes.  —  222. 

Attributes  are  non-combinative  causes  but  not  combinative  causes 
also,  whereby  they  might  be  receptacles  or  fields  of  action.  And  that 
non-combinative  causality  arises,  in  some  cases,  from  combination  in 
the  same  object  with  the  effect,  as  that  of  the  conjunction  of  soul  and 
mind  in  the  particular  attributes  of  the  soul,  and  of  conjunction, 
disjunction,  and  sound  in  sound,  and,  in  other  cases,  from  combination 
in  the  same  object  with  the  cause,  as  that  of  the  colour,  etc.,  of  pot 
sherds,  etc.,  in  the  colour,  etc.,  of  the  water-pot,  etc.  —  24. 


vTiti.  —  The  use  of  l  cause  '  instead  of  causes,  is  aphoristic. 
Space  is  a  non-combinative  cause. 


.—  It  may  be  objected  :  —  Action  is  produced  here.  Action  is  produced  now. 
On  the  strength  of  such  perceptions,  Space  andfTime  also  are  surely  combinative  causes  of 
action.  How,  otherwise,  could  they  be  assigned  as  the  seat  of  action  in  these  oases  ? 
Accordingly  he  says: 


II 

-\ 

Trap  Gunaih,  by  attributes.  f^>  Dik,  space.  STR^ffi!  Vyakhyatah.    ex 
plained. 

25.     Space  is  explained  by  Attributes. — 223. 

The  meaning  is  that  gravity,  and  other  attributes,  being  impon 
derable,  are  not  the  combinative  cause  of  action,  so  space  also,  being 
imponderable,  is  not  the  combinative  cause  of  action.  As  to  being  the 
-.seat  or  receptacle,  however,  it  can  arise  even  without  combinative; 


VAI£E§IKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


causality,    as  in  "  cotton-seeds    in    a    bowl,"  "  curd  in    a    bowl/'  "  the 
roaring  of  a  lion  in  the  forest/'  and  other  instances.  —  25. 

Time  is  an  efficient  cause. 
Upaskdra.  —  With  the  same  object  as  already  stated,  he  saya  : 

II  *  R  I 


Karanena,  by  cause,  i.  e.,  by  way  of  efficient    causality. 
Kalah.,     Time. 

26.  By  way  of  (efficient)  causality,  (the  reference  of  action 
to  Time  as  its  seats,  being  explained),  Time  (is  explained  to  be 
inactive,  so  far  as  combinative  causality  is  concerned).—  224. 

The  syntactical  connection  of  the  aphorism  is  with  "  explained  to 
be  inactive,"  —  corresponding  words  in  the  preceding  aphorism,  with 
necessary  changes.  The  use  of  'Karanena/  instead  of  '  nimittakar 
auena/  is  an  instace  of  denoting  an  object  principally  as  an  existence, 
(i.e.,  without  qualification).  The  meaning,  therefore,  is  that  Time, 
being  the  efficient  cause,  is  only  the  seat  of  action,  but  is  not  its  com 
binative  cause.  —  26. 

Here  ends  the  second  chapter  of  the  fifth  book  in  the  Commentary^ 
of  Sankara  upon  the  Vissesika  Aphorisms. 


KANlDA  SftTRAS  VI,  1,  2.  175 

BOOK  SIXTH—  CHAPTER  FIRST- 
The  Veda  is  a  work  of  intelligence,  and  therefore,  authoritative, 

Upaskdra.  —  The  subject,  of  the  sixth  book  is  th^  examination  of  dhar/na,,  virtue  or  merit, 
and  adharma,  vioe  or  demerit,  whiea  are  the  root  causes  of  transmigration,  Dhartna  and 
adharma,  again,  have  to  b->  supposed  on  the  strength  of  such  precepts  aad  prohibitions  as 
"  Let  him  who  desire  heavoa,  perform  sacrifices."  "  Let  him  not  eat  tobacco,"  etc.,  and  their 
existence  depends  upon  the  authoritativaness  of  these  perceptive  and  prohibitive  texts.  And 
that  authoritativeness  can  be  possible  or  arise  from  the  speaker's  previously  possessing  the 
attribute  characterised  as  knowledge  of  the  moaning  of  the  sentences  as  corresponding  to 
objective  reality  since  authoritativeness  per  se  is  excluded.  Hence  the  author,  in  the  first 
place,  commerces  the  demonstration  of  the  attribute  which  clothes  the  Veda  with  authorita 
tiveness. 


g'^jo^^  Buddhi-purvva,  preceded  by  understanding,  ^,f^^%:  Vakya- 
Kritih,  composition  of  sentences.  ^  Vede,  in  the  Veda. 

1.     In  the  Veda  the  composicion  of  sentence  has  been  preced 
ed  by  understanding.  —  225 

1  Vakya-kritih/  i.  e.,  composition  of  sentences,  is  '  buddhi-purvva/ 
i.  e.,  preceded  by  the  speaker's  k  lowledge  of  the  meaning  of  the  sen 
tences  as  corresponding  to  objective  reality  because  it  is  composition 
of  sentences,  like  composition  by  ourselves  and  others  of  such  sentences 
as  "  There  lie  five  fruits  on  the  bank  of  the  river.' 

'  In  the  Veda  '  means  in  the  aggregate  of  sentences.  Here  the  com 
position  of  aggregated  sentences  is  the  paksa  (i.  e.,  the  subject  of  the 
conclusion).  It  cannot  be  otherwise  established  (as  authoritative), 
namely  by  the  characteristic  of  being  preceded  by  the  understanding 
of  ourselves  a-.id  others  ;  for,  in  such  instances  as  "  Let  him  who  desires 
heaven,  perform  sacrifices,"  the  fact  that  performance  of  sacrifices  is 
a  means  of  attaining  the  desired  object,  or  that  securing  heaven  is  an 
effect,  is  beyond  th«  reach  of  our  and  others'  understanding.  It  is, 
therefore,  proved  that  the  Veda,  as  au  effect,  has  for  its  antecedent  an 
Absolute  or  Independent  Person.  And  the  characteristic  of  the  Veda 
is  that,  while  the  subject  of  its  mea.iing  is  not  certain  knowledge  pro 
duced  by  proof  other  than  the  proof  supplied  by  words  and  all  that 
which  depends  upon  them,  it  is  word  of  which  the  proof  or  authority  is 
not  produced  by  knowledge  of  the  meaning  of  sentences  produced  by 
words.  —  1. 

VivT'iti-  —  By  this  aphorism,  the    doctrine  of    Mimamsa    philosophy, 
that  word  is  eternal,  is  refuted. 

The  Veda  is  a  work  of  intelligence,  and  therefore,  authoritative,  continued. 

Upaskdra.  —  He   shows   in   another   manner   that   the    sentences   of   the   Veda  have  boon 
•preceded  by  understanding  : 


H     n  i  R  ii 


Brahmane,  in  the  portion  of  Veda,  so  called.  ^|<fc*V  Samjna- 
Karma,  attribution  or  distribution  of  names,  f^fe^g^  Siddhi-lingam, 
mark  of  knowledge  of  things  named,  or  of  the  conclusion  that  the  Veda, 
is  an  intelligent  production. 


176  VAI!§ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


The  distribution  of  names  in  the  Brfihmana  (portion  of 
the  Veda)  is  a  mark  of  knowledge,  (on  the  part  of  the  framer  of 
the  names),  of  the  things  named  (therein). — 226. 

Here  '  Brahmanaiii  '     denotes    a    particular    portion    of    the    Veda. 
1  Samjna-Karmma,'  i.  e  ,  the  distribution  of  names,  which  appears  there, 
points  to  understanding  on  the  part    of  the  framer  of    the  names,  as    in 
the    world    the    distribution    of  such    names    as    Long-ear,    Long-nose 
Long-neck,  does. — 2. 

The  Veda  is  a  work  of  intelligence,  and  therefore,  authoritative, 

continued. 
Upaskdra. — He  mentions  another  form  of  proof  : 

II  $  I  \\  \  II 

m  Buddhi-purvvah,  preceded  by  understanding.  TOfr:  Dadatih, 
givf s,  to  give,  gift. 

3.  (Precepts  enjoining)  gift  (are)  preceded  by  understanding. 
—227. 

The  injunction  of  gift  (as  a  source  of  dharma),  which  has  been 
established  in  such  text  as  "  Let  him  who  desires  heaven,  give  a  cow," 
has  been  made  from  the  knowledge  that  it  is  the  means  of  attaining 
the  object  desired.  The  conjugated  form,  <  dadatih,'  gives,  topically 
denotes  '  gift  '  which  is  the  meaning  of  the  root  '  to  give.' 3. 

Above    continued. 
Upaskdra — He  gives  yet  another  proof  : 

a  $  i  n  a  ii 

Tatha,  so,  the  same.  Slfwflf:  Pratigrahah  acceptance. 

4.  The  same  is  acceptance  (of  a  gift.) — 228. 

Texts  of  the  Veda,  enjoining  acceptance  of  gifts,  are  also  preceded 
by  understanding.  The  word,  "pratigrahah"  indicates  a  Vedic  text 
of  which  it  is  the  subject.  Thus,  texts  of  the  Veda,  enjoining  accep 
tance  of  land,  etc.,  imply  its  efficacy  to  the  welfare  of  the  acceptor. 
Texts  of  the  Veda,  of  which  the  subject-matter  is  the  acceptance  of  the 
skin  of  a  black-and-white  antelope,  point  out  or  bring  to  light  it* 
efficacy  towards  that  which  is  not  desired  by  the  acceptor.  And 
efficacy  towards  the  desired  and  efficacy  towards  the  undesired,  or 
potencies  for  good  and  for  evil,  cannot,  in  these  cases,  appropriately 
fall  within  the  cognizance  of  t,he  understanding  of  persons  later 
born. — 4. 


i. — Although  all  these  have  been  already  explained  by  the- 
Erst  aphorism,  still  this  much  undertaking  is  for  the  purpose  of  point 
ing  out  some  of  the  dharmas  or  duties. 


KANlDA  SfiTRAS  VI,  1,  5.  177 

Attributes  of  one  soul  do  not  produce  effects  in  another  soul  :  he 

reaps  who  sows. 

Upaskdra.  —  Now,   in   justification   of   the   aphorism   of   Jaimini,     "Result  (of   action), 
indicated  by  the  gastra,  (  aocruse  )  to  the  performer,  "  (Purva-Mlmariisa  Sutram)  he  saya  : 


$  I  $  I  Ml 

Atma-antara-gunanam,    of   the    attributes  of   one  sold. 
Atma-antare,    in    another    soul.    ^T^TW^'RC,    A-karanatvat,   be 
cause  there  is  no  causality. 

5.  ["  Result  (of  action)  indicated  by  the  Sastra,  (accrues) 
to  the  performer"],  because  there  is  no  causality  of  the  attributes 
of  one  soul  in  (the  attributes  of)  another  soul.  —  229. 

Because  the  attributes  of  one  soul,  e.  g.,  merits  and  demerits  arising 
fromsacrifice,  slaughter,  etc.,  are  not  causes  of  the  attributes,  in  the  shape 
of  pleasure  and  pain,  of  another  soul.  This  being  the  case,  pleasure 
and  pain  are  produced  by  dharma  and  dharma  appertaining  to  each 
individual  soul,  and  not  by  dharma  and  dharma  existing  in  different 
substrata.  Otherwise,  the  fruits  of  sacrifice,  slaughter,  etc.,  will 
accrue  to  him  by  whom  these  were  not  performed,  and  hence,  loss  of 
the  fruits  of  acts  done,  and  acquisition  of  the  fruits  of  acts  not  done 
will  be  the  result. 

Objection.  —  There  is  no  such  universal  rule  since  there  is  a  viola 
tion  of  it  in  the  sacrifice  for  the  birth  of  a  son,  sacrifice  in  favour  of 
the  departed  ancestors,  etc.  Thus,  it  is  heard  that  the  fruits  of 

jSrdddha  or  performance  of  obsequies,  etc.,  performed  by  the  son,  accrue 
to  the  departed  ancestor  ;  it  is  also  heard  that  the  fruit  of  the  sacrifice 
for  the  birth  of  a  son,  performed  by  the  father,  accrues  to  the  son. 
You  connot  say  that  here  is  really  in  these  cases  the  co-existence  of 
the  performance  and  its  fruit  is  the  same  subject,  the  agent-enjoyer, 
by  means  of  the  fruit  accruing  to  the  son  and  the  departed  ancestor  ; 

in  the  one  case,  the  fruit  of  the  Sraddha  accrues  to  the  son  in  this  way 
that  he  becomes  the  son  of  departed  ancestors  participating  in  the 
enjoyments  of  heaven  and  in  the  other  case,  the  fruit  of  the  sacrifice 
accrues  to  the  father  in  this  way-that  he  becomes  the  father  of  a. 
vigorous  son. 

For  this  view  his  adristam  becomes  inoperative,  conflicts  with  the 
Veda  ;  for,  it  is  heard  that  the  fruit  is  only  the  satisfaction,  etc.,  of 
the  departed  ancestor,  and  the  vigorousness,  etc.,  of  the  son,  the  sup 
position  of  any  other  fruit  being  precluded  by  redundancy. 

Anwer.  —  Let  then  dpurvam  or  adristam  accrue  to  the  agent  as  the 
fruit,  while  heaven  accrues  to  the  departed  ancestor. 

Objection  —  It  cannot  be  so,  since  activity  must  in  your  theory, 
uniformly  co-exist  in  the  same  subject  with  the  fruit.  Otherwise  where,, 
immediately  after  the  performance  of  the  £rdddha,  the  son  is  liberated 
and  consequently,  heaven  will  not  accrue  to  the  departed  ancestor. 


178  VAlSESxKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

Objection- — It  cannot  be  said  that  it  "  will  not  accrue,"  since  it  is 
the  same  in  the  other  way,  for,  when  the  departed  ancestor  is  already 
liberated  (t.  e.,  freed  from  the  bonds  of  all  enjoyment  and  suffering  what 
ever)  (prior  to  the  performance  of  the  Srdddha)  then  no  such  fruit  will 
issue  from  the  Sraddha,  however  perfect  it  may  be  in  all  its  parts. 

Conclusion. — But  this  is  not  the  case.  For,  the  declaration  that 
u  Result  (of  action),  indicated  by  the  Sastra,  (accrues)  to  the  performer, 
being  a  general  rule,  admits  of  exception,  in  the  presence  of  a  strong 
contradiction,  and,  in  the  matter  in  hand,  it  is  the  Sruti,  or  Revelation 
of  the  fruit  accruing  to  the  departed  ancestor  and  the  son,  which  is  the 
contradication. 

Objecti(n. — This  being  so,  there  is  proving  too  much. 

Answer. — Not  so,  for,  the  corresponding  texts  of  the  Veda  them 
selves  prevent  any  such  too  much  proving. 

Another  objection. — In  the  case  of  the  greatest  gifts  (mahdddnam,  a 
technical  term  which  denotes  sixteen  kinds  of  specially  meritorious 
gift),  heaven  only  (*.  e.,  heaven  without  the  mention  of  the  enjoyer)  is 
fruit,  and  in  the  name  of  whomsoever  person  they  declared  to  be  are 
performed,  the  fruit  they  produce,  accrues  to  that  person. 

Answer. — This  is  an  absurd  argument.  For,  here  there  being  no 
contradiction  to  the  general  observation,  the  general  observation 
accompanied  with  the  absence  of  contradiction  or  exceptional  instance, 
becomes  the  rule,  and  hence,  it  would  not  follow  that  kings  and  such 
other  persons  need  not  observe  fast,  etc.,  though  observance  of  such  and 
such  acts  would  be  possible  for  them  by  means  of  other  persons,  with 
the  intention  or  prayer  that  the  fruit  of  those  acts  may  accrue  to  the 
former.  Moreover,  it  is  the  rule,  that  the  thorough  performance  of  the 
duties  of  a  householder  produces  fruit  in  the  form  of  attainment  of  the 
world  of  Brahmd,  and  thus  the  declaration  in  general  terms  has  been 
made  with  the  object  of  showing  that  fruit  accrues  to  each  individual 
agent. 

The  writer  of  the  Vfitti,  however,  says  :  "  Result  (of  action),  indi 
cated  by  the  {§astra,"  etc.,  is  really  a  rule  without  an  exception.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  fruit  which  accrues  to  the  departed  ancestor,  etc., 
results  from  the  influence  of  benedictory  mantras  pronounced  by 

Brahmanas  entertained  at  the  /Srdaddha,  etc.,  the  mantras  in  question 
being  in  the  case  of  sacrifice  for  the  departed  ancestor,  "  May  thy 
pitris  or  departed  ancestors  have  their  objects  fulfilled,"  and,  in  the 
case  of  sacrifice  for  the  son,  "  May  a  son  be  born  unto  thee,  who  will  be 
vigorous,  beautiful  as  the  moon,  and  the  feeder  of  all,"  in  the  same  way 
as  neutralization  of  the  effect  of  poison  on  the  body  of  a  person  bitten, 
by  a  snake,  is  produced  from  the  recitation  of  mantras  or  incantation 
by  foresters. — 5. 

Vivfiti. — "  Result  (of  action),  indicated  by  the  Sastra,  (accrues)  to 
the  performer,'' — this  aphorism  of  the  system  of  Jaimini  should  be 
supplied  at  the  end  of  the  present  aphorism  ;  for  otherwise,  the  ablative 
in  it  will  remain  unconnected. 


KANADA  SUTRAS  VI,  1,8.  179 


Entertainment  of  impure  Brdhmanas  at  a  Srdddha  is  useless. 

Upaskdra.  —  Those  fruits  accrue  from  the  benediction  of  Brdhmanas  who  have  been 
aatisfied  with  the  entertainment,  and  who  are  not  wicked,  in  other  words,  whose  conduct  is 
in  accordance  with  the  Sdstra,  but  not  from  the  benediction  of  the  wicked  who  have  been 
excluded  from  the  category  of  recipients,  e  g.,  an  illegitimate  son  born  during  wedlock,  an 
illegitimate  son  born  after  the  death  of  the  husband,  etc.  This  is  what  he  says  here  : 


n  ^  I  *  i  $  n 

fl^  Tat,  that,  i.  e.,  the  fruit  of  benediction.  £g4fcl%  Dusta-bhojane, 
(Sraddha)  in  which  impure  (Brahmanas)  are  entertained.  *  Na,  not.  fcej^ 
Vidyate,  exists,  accrues. 

6.     That  does  not   exist  where    the    impure    are    entertained. 
230. 

'  Tat  '  alludes    to    the    fruit    of   benediction.     The  meaning  is  that 

where  at  a  Srdddha  (i.  e.,  the  observance  of  obsequial  rites)  evil  or 
impure  Brahmanas  are  entertained  there  the  fruit  of  benediction  does 
not  accrue  to  the  departed  ancestor,  or  the  meaning  is  this  that  the 

fruit  of  the  Srdddha  itself  does  not  accrue  to  the  departed  ancestor.  —  6. 

Impure  explained. 

Upaskdra.  —  Who  are  they  that  are  called  impure  ?     Accordingly  he  states  the  characteris 
tic  of  the  impure. 


?  I  V9  0 

55  Dustam,  wickedness,  impurity.  fl'^-TTTPl  Himsayam,  in  killing. 
7.     Impurity  (lies)  in  killing.— 231. 

Here  '  himsayam '  is  indicative  of  all  prohibited  acts  whatever. 
The  meaning,  therefore,  is  that  a  person,  given  to  or  occupied  in  a  pro 
hibited  act,  should  be  known  as  impure — 7. 

Association  with  the  impure  is  sinful. 

Upaskdra.— He  says   that  ,not   only   non-existence  of  fruit  accrues   from  entertaining  an 
impure  Brahmana  invited  at  a  Srdddha,  but  sin  also  accrues. 

M  I  I  I  «  II 


Tasya,  his,  of  the  wicked  or  impure  Brahmana.  ^TTfasqTfrr/T:  Sa- 
mabhivyaharatah,  from  companionship  or  association.  $fa:  Dosah,  vice, 
demerit,  adharma. 

8.     Demerit  results  from  association  with  him.—  232. 

The  meaning  is  that  '  dosah,'  i.  e.,  sin,  accrues,  'Samabhivyaha- 
ratah,'  i.  e.,  from  association,  characterised  as  eating  in  the  same  row, 
sleeping  in  company,  reading  in  company,  etc.,  with  a  Brahmana 
engaged  in  forbidden  acts.  —  8. 

Entertainment  of  a  pure   Brahmana  is  not  sinful. 

Lr2>at<kdra.—Doen  then  sin  accrue  also  from  association  with  one  who  is   not  impure  ?  H« 
sayi,  No. 


180  VAI&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


II  $  I  ?  I  8.  II 

^  Tat,  that,  i".  e.,  sin.  "Sjjg  A-duste,  in  the  case  of  (entertaining) 
one  who  is  not  impure.  ?f  Na,  not.  frq^1  Vidyate,  exists,  accrues. 

9.     This  does  not    accure  in    the  case   of    (entertaining)    one 
who  is  not  impure.  —  233. 

The  meaning  is  that  'tat,'  i.  e.,  sin,  '  na  vidyate,'  i.  e.,  does  not 
accrue,  where  a  Brahmana,  whose  conduct  is  in  accordance  with  the 
precepts  and  prohibitions  of  the  Sdstra,  is  entertained  at  a  Sraddha  —  9. 

Preference  should  be  given  to  worthy  recipients  afterwards. 

Upaskdra.  —  It  may  be  asked,  what  should  the  rule  of  conduct  be  in  a  case  where  worthy 
recipients  being  not  available,  unworthy  ones  are  at  first  invited,  but  gradually  worthy  recipi 
ents  become  available.  To  this  he  replies  : 


:  n  ^  \ 


5^:  Punah,  again,  afterwards,  fafat  Vifiiste,  in  or  to  a  superior,  or 
a  qualified  or  worthy  person,  i.  e  ,  recipient.  5^%:  Pravrittih,  inclina 
tion,  attention,  preference. 

10.     Preference  (should  be  given),  to  a  worthy   recipient  (who 
is  available)  afterwards.  —  234. 

At  a  Srdddha,  or  where  gifts  have  to  be  received,  if  qualified  per 
sons,  i.  e.,  those  who  do  not  transgress  the  rules  of  the  Sdstra  in  their 
conduct,  are  obtained,  then  one  should  entertain  them  only,  leaving 
aside  the  censurable  ones,  although  invited.  The  rule,  "  One  should 
not  reject  persons  invited,"  refers  to  worthy  recipients  only.  One  should, 
however,  gratify  censurable  persons,  who  have  been  invited,  by  giving 
money,  etc.  —  10. 

Vivriti.  —  But  what  is  to  be  done  where  Srdddka,  etc.,  have  been  per 
formed  through  the  services  of  an  impure  Bramana  ?  He  gives  the 
reply  : 

Attention  should  be  given  to  the  thing  of  quality,  i.  e.,  the,  re-per 
formance  of  the  tirdddha,  etc.,  by  a  pure  Brahmana,  etc.  The  Srdddha> 
previously  performed,  is  all  useless.  This  is  the  'import. 

Equals  or  inferiors,  if  pure  ,  should  be  accepted  as  guests  or  recipients. 

Upaslcdra.  —  He  lays  down  the  rule  of  conduct  where,  at  a  Srdddha,   distribution  of  gifts, 
etc.,  recipients  superior  to  the  agent  himself,  are  not  obtained  : 


H^   Same,  in  or  to  an  equal,    ffi   Hine,  in  or  to,an  inferior.    ?TT   Va, 
or.  ST^frT:  Pravrittih,  inclination,  attention,  preference. 

11.     Preference    (should    be    given)    to   an     equal,    or  to   an 
inferior,  (if  he  is  free  from  impurity  or  fault).  —  235. 


KANlDA  SfrTRAS  VI,  1,  13.  181 

r 

The  meaning  is  that  at  Srdddha,  charity,  etc.,  attention  or  prefer 
ence  should  be  given  to  a  recipient,  free  from  fault,  who  is  equal,  i.  e., 
like  oneself,  or  inferior,  i.  e.,  less  than  oneself,  in  point  of  merit,  etc., 
because  happiness  accrues,  to  the  departed  ancestor,  from  blessings 
pronounced  by  them  only.  The  import  is  that  persons  prohibited  are 
by  all  means  to  be  rejected,  but  not  the  pure,  whether  they  be  equals  or 
inferiors.  —  11. 

Reception  of  gift  i.y  also  a  source  of  dharma,  or}    stealing  is  not  sinful, 

in  certain  circumstances. 

Upaskdra.  —  Having  described  the  production  of  adharma,  by  the  meritorious  character 
of  the  donation  at  a  Sraddha  or  charity,  he  extends  production  of  dharma  from  reception  also 
of  a  similar  nature  : 


n  $  i  n  vui 

Etena,  by    this.    fK^TM^=nfrT%»T:    Hina-sama-vifiista  dharm- 
'mikebhyah,  from  inferior,     equal,   superior    virtuous    persons.     'K^fT^T'f 
Parasva-adanam,    reception  of     property.     sq^MId'^    tVyakhyatam,    ex 
plained. 

12.     By  this  is  explained  reception  of  property  from    virtuous 
persons  who  are  inferior,  equal,  or  superior  (to  oneself).—  236. 

The  excellence  of  dharma,  is  in  the  order  of  its  mention.  The  mean 
ing  is  that  dharma,  accrues  from  the  reception  of  a  gift  of  land,  etc., 
from  a  virtuous  person,  whether  he  be  inferior,  equal,  or  superior  to 
oneself.  '  Parasvadanaia  '  means  reception  of  property  from  another. 

The  writer  of  the  Vritti,  however,  says  :  "  '  Parasvadanam/  i.  e.t 
the  taking  of  another's  property,  by  theft,  etc.,  is  explained.  Thus, 
according  to  the  fjruti,  5$jgf^  fl-c^f^qRiqq-  ^ffaqi^  ^^  m^Tf^sn^f^j  to 
save  himself  or  his  family,  suffering  from  starvation,  a  man  may  steal 
the  food  of  a  Siidra,  when  he  has  not  obtained  food  for  seven  days. 
Similarly,  when  he  has  not  obtained  food  for  ten  days,  or  when  he  has 
not  obtained  food  for  fifteen  days,  or  when  life  is  in  danger,  to  steal 
food  from  a  Vaifiya,  a  Ksatriya,  or  a  Brahmana  respectively,  does  not 
tend  to  adharma  or  sin."  —  12. 

Killing  is  not  sinful  in  certain  circumstances. 

UpaskAra.—  -Not  only  is  the  taking  of   another's  proparty,    when   life   is  in    danger,    nofc 

'forbidden,  but  in  such   circumstances    those  who  do  nofc   give   anything   to  take   away,    may 

•even  be  put  to  death.     By  all  this  there  is  no  loss  of  dbar/na,  or   app3arano3  or  production  of 
.adharma.     This  is  what  he  saya  : 


II  $  I  n  U  II 

Tatha,    likewise,    frs^f^   Viruddhanam,    of  th*se  wh«    stand  in 
the  way.  &ni\:  Tyagah,  the  making  away  with. 

13.     Likewise  the  making  away  with  those  who    stand  in  the 
Way,  (is  justified).  —  237. 


182  VAI£E$IKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

The  meaning  is  that  they  are  to  be  put  to  death  who  act  in  the  con 
trary  manner,  (i.  e.,  who  play  the  enemy),  in  such  circumstances.  So  it 
has  been  said  : 


'•  Let  a  man  save  his  poor  self  by  whatsoever  deed,  mild  or  cruel. 
When  he  is  able,  let  him  practise  dharma  or  righteousness."  —  13. 

Vivriti.  —  He  points  out  that  certain  censurable  deeds  also  do  not 
produce  sin  : 

The  meaning  is  that  the  killing  of  those  who  are  about  to  take 
one's  life,  is  likewise  not  forbidden,  according  to  the  saying  "  Let  one- 
kill  an  aggressive  felon  without  a  second  thought." 

Note.  —  The  author  of  the  Upaskara  gives  up  his  own  context,  and 
here  follows  the  Vritti  quoted  by  him  under  the  preceding  aphorism. 

Above  continued. 

Upaskdra.  —  But  is  the  making  away  with    another  to  be   resorted  to  with  any  distinction- 
whatever  ?     He  says,  No  : 


r:  II  $  I  \  [  ?8  U 

^%    Hine,    in    an     inferior.    ^    Pare,    in     another.     r*TT»T:     Tyagahr 
making  away  with,  killing. 

14.     Making  away   with    another    (is    not    sinful),    if    (he    is) 
inferior  (to  oneself.) — 238 

If  another  who  does  not  give    anything  to    take  away,  is  inferior  to 
oneself,  he,  the  Sudra,  or  the  like,  maybe  put  to  death. — 14. 

Vivriti. — '  Para  '  means  an  enemy,  (and  not  one    who  does  not  give 
anything  to  take   away). 

Killing  is  not  sinful  in  certain    circumstances,  continued. 
Upaskdra. — With  reference  to  an  equal,  he  says  : 


II 

^  Same,  in  the  case  of  an  equal.  ?HcTrc*n*T:  Atma-tyagah,  self- 
abandonment.  Suicide.  TroW:  Para-tyagah,  destruction  of  another. 
m  V  a,  or. 

15.     In  the  cause  of  an  equal,    either   suicide    or    destruction! 
of  the  other  (may  be  resorted  to). — 239. 

Where  it  is  a  Brahmana,  equal  to  oneself,  who  becomes  the  ad 
versary,  theri  destruction  of  oneself  only  by  starvation,  etc.,  is  to  be- 
committed.  Or,  if  there  appear  no  other  means  of  preserving  oneself 
or  one's  family,  and  the  opponent  be  an  equal,  he  is  to  be  then  made- 
away  with. — 15. 

Above  continued. 

Upaskdra. — If,  then,  a  person,  superior  to  oneself,  become   the  adversary,  should  he  ever* 
bo  put  to  death  ?     He  says,  No  : 


KANADA  SftTRAS  VI,  1,  16.  183 


I  t  I  M  II 


f  %  II 

Visiste,  in  the  case  of  a  superior.  «nr*T?^TT:    Atmatyagah   self- 
destruction.  ff?t  Iti,  finis. 

16.     In   the   case   of    superior,  self-destruction  (is  to  be  com 
mitted).—  240. 

In  the  case  of  a  person,  supericr  to  oneself,  i.  e.,  excellent  by  the 
study  of  the  Veda,  etc.,  becomming  the  opponent,  destruction  of  oneself 
only  is  lawful.  The  meaning  is  that  even  when  life  is  in  danger,  a  man. 
may  design  only  his  own  death,  but  must  not  slay  a  Brahmana. 

'  Iti  '  indicates  the  end  of  the  chapter.  —  16. 

Here  ends  the  first  chapter  of  the  sixth  book  in  'the  Gonimeatary 
of  Sankara  upon  the  Vaisesika  Aphorisms. 


184  VA1&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY 

BOOK    SIXTH—  CHAPTER  SECOND. 

Exaltation  is  the  motive  of  actions  of  which  no  visible  motive  exists. 

Upaskdra.—ThuB,  in  the  first  chapter,  because  the  proof,  supplied  by  the  Veda,  is 
produced  by  some  attribute  or  quality,  therefore,  in  connection  with  its  production,  a  descrip 
tion  of  the  attribute  or  quality  then  the  consideration  that  "  Result  (  of  action  ),  indicated 
by  the  S^stra,  (accrues)  to  the  performer,"  and  also  the  consideration  of  this  that  under 
certain  circumstances  there  is  non-production  of  demerit,  even  on  the  performance  of  for 
bidden  acts,  have  taken  place.  Now,  the  author,  with  a  view  to  explain  fehe  second  aphorism, 
"  Dharma  is  that  from  which  (results)  the  attainment  of  exaltation  and  the  Supreme  Good" 
(I.  i.  2,  above),  is  going  to  make  an  examination  of  the  production  of  dharma  or  merit,  in 
particular  cases,  and  accordingly  he  says  : 


t  Drista-adrista-prayojananam,  of  which  the  motives  are 
risible  and  invisible.  ^gTHT^T  Drista-abhave,  where  no  visible  motive 
exists.  snftlR  Prayojanam,  motive.  ^VH^F!  Abhyudayaya,  for  the  purpose 
of  exaltation  or  knowledge  of  reality. 

1.  (Of  actions)  of  which  the  motives  are  visible  and  invisible, 
the  motive,  where  no  visible  (motive)  exists,  (tends)  to  exaltation. 
—241. 

Actions  of  which  the  motives  are  visible,  are  agriculture,  com 
merce,  service  under  the  king,  etc.  Actions  of  which  the  motives  are 
invisible,  are  sacrifice,  charity,  brahmacliarya  or  celibacy  and  devotion 
to  learning,  etc.  Amongst  these  actions,  where  no  visible  object  is 
observed,  there  an  invisible  object  has  to  be  supposed.  And  that  is 
conducive  to  '  exaltation,'  i.  c.,  knowledge  of  reality  or  truth.  Or,  in 
'  abhyudayaya/  the  dative  has  been  used  in  the  sense  of  the  nomina 
tive.  The  meaning,  therefore,  is  that  the  fruit  (of  the  action)  is  exalta 
tion.  The  invisible  fruit  is  nothing  but  adristam  (or  potential  after 
effects  of  past  acts).  If  it  is  produced  by  yoga  or  holy  communion,  then 
the  exaltatton  is  spiritual  intuition  of  tho  self.  If  it  is  produced  byr 
sacrifice,  charity,  etc.,  then  the  exaltation  is  heaver..  Here,  again, 
unlike  the  actions  milking,  cooking,  etc.,  which  bear  fruit  then  and 
there  but  like  the  actions  sowing,  ploughing,  etc.,  which  bear  fruit 
after  a  while,  the  actions  sacrificing,  giving  alms,  practising  brahma- 
charya,  etc.,  by  no  means  bear  fruit  then  and  there,  for  no  such  pro 
duction  of  fruit  is  observed.  Nor  are  gain,  etc.,  through  being  known 
as  virtuous,  themselves  the  fruit  ;  for  those  who  practise  brahmacharya 
have  no  eye  to  such  fruit.  Therefore,  heaven,  etc.,  which  will  accrue 
in  the  distant  future,  are  the  fruit.  And  this  is  not  immediately  con 
nected  with  action  which  by  nature  speedily  vanishes  out  of  exis 
tence.  Hence  it  results  that  there  is  an  intermediate  common  sub 
stratum  of  the  action  and  the  fruit,  and  this  is  aptirvam  or  adristam. 

Actions  of  which  the  motive  is  invisible. 
[  UpasMra.  —  He  enumerates  actions  of  which  the  fruits  are  invisible  : 


II  ^  I  R  I  R  II 


KANiDA   StTRAS  VI,  2,  3.  185 


Abhiseoha- 

na—upavasa—brahmacharyya— gurukulavasa— van  aprastha~y  ajna—dana- 
proksana-dikasatra-kala-niyamah — Ablution,  Fast,  Brahmacharya,  Resi 
dence  in  the  family  of  the  preceptor  ,  Life  of  retirement  in  the  forest, 
Sacrifice,  Gift,  Oblation,  Direction,  Constellation,  Seasons  and  Reli 
gious  observances.  ^  Cha,  and.  5T^gT*I  Adristaya,  condusive  to  adristam, 
or  invisible  fruit. 

2.  Ablution,  fast,  brahmacharya,  residence  in  the  family  of 
the  preceptor,  life  of  retirement  in  the  forest,  sacrifice,  gift,  obla 
tion,  directions,  constellations,  seasons,  and  religious  observances 
conduce  to  invisible  fruit. — 242. 

1  Adrstfiya  '  means  for  the  purpose  of  the  fruit  characterised  as 
adristam,  or  for  the  purpose  of  the  fruit,  characterised  as  heaven  and 
salvation,  through  the  gate  of  adristam.  Hereby  are  included  all  actions 
or  duties  enjoined  in  the  Veda  and  smriti  and  having  adrtstam  as  their 
fruit.  Here  '  abhisechanam  means  ablution  as  enjoined  in  such  precepts 
as  "  One  should  bathe  in  the  Ganga  (Ganges)."  Fast  denotes  such  as  is 
enjoiued  in  such  precepts  as  "  One  should  abstain  from  food  on  the 
eleve  ith  day  of  the  moon."  l  Brahmacharyyam  '  means  clutivation  of 
dharma  in  general.  '  Gurukulavasah/  is  that  of  Brahmachdrins  or  stu 
dents  for  the  purpose  of  studying  the  Veda  the  twelve-year  vow  called 
Mahdvrata,  etc.,  '  Vanaprastham'  means  the  duty  of  those  who  have 
retired  to  the  forest  011  the  ripening  of  age.  'Yajiiah'  denotes  Rdjaasuya, 
Vdjapeya,  and  other  sacrifices.  'Dan  am' is  as  en  joined  by  such  precepts  as 
''One  sbould  give  away  a  cow."  '  Proksanam,'  is  as  enjoined  by  such 
precepts  as  "One  should  offer  rice."  'Dik'  denotes  such  as  is  enjoined  by 
the  precepts.,  "One  should  perform  sacrifice  on  an  altar  inclined  towards 
the  east,"  "  One  should  eat  rice,  etc.,  facing  towards  the  east,"  etc. 
1  Naksatram  '  is  such  as  Maghd  (the  tenth  lunar  asterism),  etc.,  on  the 
occasion  of  a  sadddha,  etc.  '  Mantrali'  denotes  "  0,  ye  waters,  who  are 
the  sources  of  pleasures,"  etc.  (Rig  Veda  X.  ix.  1),  and  other  sacred 
hymns.  '  Kalah'  is  as  is  enjoined  by  such  precepts  as  "  IVIonth  after 
month  food  shall  be  given  to  theo  "  where  one  should  offer  food  in  the 
afteri  0011  of  the  day  of  new  moon,  "  In  summer  let  one  be  surrounded 
with  five  fires,"  "  In  spring  let  one  deposit  the  sacrificial  fires,"  etc. 
1  Niyamah  '  means  conduct,  in  accordance  with  the  Sastra,  of  those 
who  observe  the  distinction  of  caste  and  the  four  stages  of  holy  living, 
i.  e.)  Varna  and  Asrama. 

Now,  it  will  be  seen  that  of  the  dharma,  so  produced,  the  soul  is  the 
combinative  cause,  conjunction  of  the  soul  and  the  mind  is  the  non- 
combinative  cause,  and  faith  and  the  knowledge  of  the  motives  or  objects 
characterised  as  heaven,  etc.,  are  the  efficient  causes. — 2. 

Other  sources  of  dharma  and  sources  of  adharma. 

UpasTc&ra. — Having  thus  mentioned  the  sources  of  dharma,  he  now  mentions  them  along 
with  the  sources  of  adharma  also  : 


186  VAI&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


Chaturafiramyam,  the  observance  of  the  four  Asramas  or 
stages  of  holy  living,  viz.,  the  life  of  continence  and  scholarship,  the 
ife  of  a  householder,  the  life  of  retirement  in  the  woods,  and  the 
life  of  absolute  selfrenunciation,  (lit.  living  on  alms).  STOl  :  Upadhah, 
defects  in  respect  of  faith,  misbeliefs  and  disbeliefs.  STg^T  Anupadlui, 
non-defects  in  respect  of  faith,  beliefs.  =g  Cha,  and. 

3.  The  observance  of  the  four  Atramas  (has  been  already 
mentioned)  Misbeliefs  and  disbeliefs  as  well  as  beliefs  are  also 
(sources  of  adnstam  or  dharma  and  adharma}.—  2^. 

That  which  is  the  means  of  dharma,  common  to  the  four  Asramas, 
has  been  (and  thus  the  sentence  should  be  completed),  e^haustivel^ 
denoted  by  the  preceding  aphorism  alone.  'Upadhah'  means  defects  of 
bhdva  (*.  e  sentiment;  or  faith  ;  'anupadhfth,  means  non-defects  of 
bhdva  or  faith  1  hey  too  should  be  understood  to  be  the  sources  of 
dharma  and  adharma,  according  to  themselves.  By  the  word,  <  upadhAh 
all  the  means  of  adharma  •have  been  included.  _  3. 

Upadha  and  anupadM  explained. 

purity,  aa  regards  their 


Bhava-dosah,  defect  of  feeling,  impurity  of  emotion,  or  of 
the  soul.  *q*T  Upadha,  (cty.)  that  which  is  placed,  or  settles,  upon  or 
near  anything.  Impurity.  ?r*fr:  Adosah,  non-defect.  ?T3^T  Anupadha, 
purity.  Purity  of  emotion,  or  of  the  soul. 

4.     Upadha    or  Impurity    (denotes)  impurity  of  emotion,  or  of 
the  soul  ;  anupadhd  (denotes)  purity.  —  244. 

Feeling,  desire,  attraction,  inattention,  unfaith,  vanity,  conceit, 
envy,  and  other  impurities  of  the  soul  are  denoted  by  the  word 
upadhd  or  impurity.  Faith,  complacence  of  mind,  perseverance 
in  the  performance  of  prescribed  actions,  determination  of  what 
should  be  done  in  particular  situation,  (or  presence  of  mind),  and 
certitude  are  called  anupadhd  or  purity  of  the  soul.  The  efficient 
causality  of  all  these  towards  dharma  and  adharma,  is  here  de 
clared.  —  4. 

What  objects  are  pure  or  holy. 

Upaskdra.  —  (Purity  and  impurity  may  be  internal  as  well  as  external,  that  is,  may  relate 
to  thought  as  well  as  to  things.  In  the  preceding  aphorism,  purities  and  impurities  of  the 
soul  have  been  mentioned.  With  regard  to  external  objects  it  is  said  as  follows).  Things 
pure  and  impure  are  also  called  upadhd  or  purity  and  anupadhd  or  impurity.  Here  he 
distinguishes  between  pure  and  impure  objects  : 

R  i^  n 


which.  £aVUyiT?SRW,    Ista-riiparasa-gandha-sparsaci  posse 
sses  prescribed!  colour,  taste;  smell,  and^touch.sJtf^RfJProksitam,  aspersed. 


KANiDA  SfiTRAS  VI,  3,  6.  187 

Sprinkled  with  water  together  with  the  pronunciation  of  mantras  or 
sacred  hymns.  «r*gf%rf  Abhyuksitam,  sprinkled  with  water  without  the 
pronunciation  of  mantras.  The  above  rendering  of  the  two  words, 
'  prok^tarii  '  abhyiksitani  '  is  in  accordance  with  the  view  of  $ankara 
misra.  But, 


"  Sprinkling  of  water  with  the  pronated  hand  is  called  proksanam  • 
that  with  supinated  hand  is  called  abhyuksanam  ;  and  the  same  with 
the  inclined  hand  is  known  as  avoJfsanam."- 

From  the  above  saying  of  the  Smriti,  it  would  appear  that  the 
correct  translations  would  be,  sprinkled  with  water  with  pronation,  in 
the  case  of  '  proksitam,'  and  sprinkled  with  water  with  supination,  in 
the  case  of  '  abhyuksitanV  ^  Cha,  and.  ?Tcj;Tat.  that  gfe  $uchi,  pure, 
clean,  holy. 

5.  The  pure  is  that  which  possesses  prescribed  Colour,  Taste, 
Smell,  and  Touch,  and  is  sprinkled  with  water  along  with  the 
recitation  of  sacred  hymns,  and  also  without  it,  or  is  sprinkled  with 
water  both  with  pronation  and  with  supination.  —  245. 

Whatever  Substance  possesses  such  colour,  etc.,  as  are  '  istam/  i.  e. 
prescribed  by  the  Veda  and  the  Smriti,  the  same  is  of  that  character 
(i.  e.,  pure).  Therein,  Colour  (is  prescribed)  in  such  texts  as  "  He 
buys  the  soma  drink  for  a  cow,  ruddy,  one  year  old,  with  tawny  eyes/3 
"  He  should  obtain  a  white  goat,"  etc.  i  Proksitaik,  means  sprinkled 
with  water  during  the  recitation  of  sacred  hymns  ;  •abhyuksitam/ 
means  sprinkled  with  water  without  any  sacred  hymn.  The  word  (  cha 
t  implies  that  which  is  lawfully  acquired,  and  that  is  brought  out  by 
such  restraining  percepts  as  "  A  Brahmana,  should  acquire  wealth  by 
performing  sacrifices,  by  teaching,  and  by  receiving  presents,  etc.  —  5. 

What  objects  are  impure  or  unholy. 
Upaskdra.  —  Ho  states  the  characteristic  of   impure  objects  : 


Asuchi,  impure.  ffrT  Iti,  this  Such,  sgfrsrf?^:  ^uchipratisedhah, 
the  negation  of  exclusion  of  the  pure. 

6.     Impure,  —  such  is  the  form   of   the    negation  of   the    pure. 
—246. 

The  meaning  is  that  the  contrary  of  such    substance    as  ia    pure,  is 
impure.     In    other    words,  a  substance  of  unpraiseworthy  colour,  taste, 
smell,  and  touch,  or  not  aspersed,  or  not  sprinkled,   or    sprinkled    with 
forbidden  water,  or  unlawfully  acquired,  as  the  substance  of  a  Brahmana 
acquired  by  agriculture  and  commerce,  is  impure.  —  6. 

What  objects  are  impure  or  unholy,  continued. 
'He  mentions  oteher  impure  objects  : 


VAI£E§IKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


n  $  i  *  {  vs  n 

Arthantaram,  something  else.     Another  thing.  ^     Cha,  and. 
7.     (It  is)  also  something  else.  —  247. 

The  meaning  is  that  where  a  thing  possesses  praiseworthy  colour, 
taste,  smell,  and  touch,  and  is  at  the  same  time  aspersed,  sprinkled,  and 
lawfully  acquired,  even  there  that  thing  also  is  impure,  if  it  is  vitiated 
by  speech  or  vitiated  by  intention.  —  7. 

To  produce'.exaltation,  purity  must  le    coupled  with  selfres-traint. 
Upaskdra.  —  Now  ho  points  ont  another  contributory  oauso  of  dharma  and  adharma  : 


n 


Ayatasy,  of  the  unrestrained.  gfavft^Rt.  £uchi-bhojanat,  from 
eating  that  which  is  pure.  3J**R?J  :  Abhyudayah,  exaltation.  ^  Na,  not. 
fq^Yidyate,  exists.  Accrues.  pnjJTpTRT^  Niyama-abhavfit,  owing  to  the 
absence  of  self-restraint.  RST^1  Vidyate,  exists.  Accrues.  ^T  Va,  and. 
?J£lfccTC?=rT3(.  Artha-antaratvat,  being  a  different  thing,  q*T^  Yamasya,  of 
self-reatraint. 

8.     To    the    unrestrained,    exaltation    does    not    accrue    from 
eating  what  is  pure,  inasmuch  as  there  is  an    absence    of   self-res 
traint  ;   and  it  accrues,  (where  there  is   self-restraint),  inasmuch  as 
self-restraint  is  a  different  thing  (from  eating).  —  248. 

'  Ayatasya  '  means  void  of  restraint,  or  unrestraint.  The  eating  of 
one,  void  of  the  restraints  brought  out  in  such  precepts  as.  "  A  man 
should  take  food  after  washing  his  hands  and  feet,  and  rinsing  his 
mouth,  restrained  in  speech,  while  taking  food,  though  restrained,  he 
should  twice  rinse  his  mouth,"  does  not  tend  to  exaltation,  but  to  sin. 
It  may  be  asked,  Why  ?  Hence  he  says,  '  niyama-abhavat/  i.  e.,  owing 
to  the  absence  of  self-restaint,  which  is  a  contributory  cause.  That 
which  takes  place  where  self-restraint  exists,  is  now  stated.  '  Vidyate 
va,,  i.  e.,  exaltation  verily  accrues  from  eating  by  means  of  the  accom 
paniment  ef  the  self-restraint  mentioned  above.  It  may  be  asked,  How  ? 
So  he  says,  '  Artha-antaratvat  yamasya,'  i.  e.,  because  self-restraint  is 
something  else  than  eating.  Therefore  the  meaning  is  that  without  the 
contributory  cause  there  is  no  production  of  the  fruit,  and  that  with  it, 
there  is  production  of  the  fruit.  —  8. 

Bhdsya  —  reads    Vidyateva  '    rthdntaratvdt    yamasya    as    a    separate 
aphorism. 

Self-restraint  alone,  again,  is  not  sujficint  for  the  purpose. 

Upaalc&ra.  —  It  may  be  objected,  "  If  self-restraint  .alone   is  the  goveruing  element,  then 
eating  is  not  a  governing  element  at  all,"  Aooordingly  he  says  : 

u  $  i  R  i  a  n 


KANlDA  SfrTRAS  VI,  2,  11.  189 


Asati,  non-existing.  ^  Cha,    and.  ^TffTTTc^  Abhavat,  because    of 
non-existence. 

9.  (Self-restraint  alone  is  not  the  cause  of  exaltation),  for 
there  is  non-existence  (of  exaltation),  where  (the  eating  of  pure 
food)  does  not  exist.  —  249. 

'  Of  exaltation'  is  the  complement  of  the  aphorism.  'Abhavat/  i.  e., 
since  exaltation  does  not  exist,  '  asati,'  i.  e.,  where  the  eating  of  pure 
food  does  not  exist,  although  there  is  self-restraint.  The  meaning,  there 
fore,  is  that  it  is  both,  of  them,  namely  self-restraint  and  eating,  which 
is  the  cause  of  merit.  The  word,  eating,  is  illustrative  Yama  and 
Niyama,  i.  e.,  self-restraint,  external  and  internal,  are  accessories  also 
of  sacrifice,  charity,  ablutions,  oblations,  and  other  actions  prescribed 
by  the  Veda  and  the  Smriti.  —  9. 

Origin  of  desire  which,  being  a  fault,  is  an    accessory  to  adharma. 

Updslcara.  —  Having  thus  stated  self  -restraint  as  a  contributory  towards  the  production 
of  dharma,  he  now  points  out  the  origin  of  fault,  with  a  view  to  spocify  fault  as  ian  (accessory 
to  adharma  : 


Sukhat,  from  pleasure.  ;TJJT:  Ragah,  (Lit.     Colouration),  Desire. 
10.     From  Pleasure  (arises)  Desire.  —  250. 

{  Sukhat,"  i.  e.,  from  pleasure  derived  from  the  enjoyment  of  gar 
lands,  sandal-paste,  women,  and  other  objects,  ragah/  i.  e.,  desire,  is 
produced  successively  for  pleasue  of  a  similar  kind,  or  for  the  means 
of  attaining  it.  It  is  also  to  be  considered  that  from  pain  begotten  by 
snakes,  thorns,  and  the  like,  aversion  arises  with  regard  to  such  pain,  or 
with  regard  to  its  source.  Desire,  aversion,  and  infatuation  are  called 
faults,  inasmuch  as  they  are  incentives  to  activity  (which  serves  to  bind 
the  agent  down  to  this  world).  Accordingly  there  is  the  aphorism  of 
G-autama,  "  Faults  have  for  their  characteristic  incitement  to  acitivity 
(or  worldly  occupation)."  (Nyaya-Sutram,  I.  i.  18),  —  10. 

Origin  of  desire  which,  being  a  fault  ,  is  an  accessory  to  adharma, 

continued. 

Upaslc&ra.—'"  Now,"  it  may  bo  objected,  "  if  only  pleasure  ani  pain  produced  desire 
and  aversion,  how  then  can  the  latter  exist  after  the  destruction  of  the  former  ?  "  Hence 
ho  says  : 

cf-fnr^ig  M  i  R  i  **  H 

W^T^^T^Tat-mayatvat  from  transformation  into,  absorption,  or  entire 
occupation  of  mind  with,  or  habituation  to,  that,  'g  Cha,  and. 

11.     (Desire  and  Aversion  arise)  also    through   habituation    to 
.that.—  251. 

'  Desire  and  aversion  arise'  —  this  is  the  complement  of  the  aphorism. 
^Tat-mayatvam  means  a  particular  kind  of  comparatively  powerful 
impression  produced  by  constant  or  habitual  experience  of  objects, 


190  VAI&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


through  the  influence  of  which,  a  sad  lover,  who  does  not  win  his  mis 
tress,  sees  his  beloved  in  every  object  ;  audihe  who  has  been  once  bitten 
by  a  snake,  i'i  consequence  of  the  strong  impression  regarding  that, 
sees  snakes  everywhere.  So  it  has  been  said,  l'  Tat-mayatvam  (lit,  full- 
of-that-ness)  means  the  manifestation  of  that  both  internally  and 
externally."  —  11. 

Above  continued. 

(Tpa,9kdra.  —  He  brings  forward  another  source  (of  desire  andjaversion)  : 

II  $  I  R  I  &  II 


Adristat,  from  destiny*or  adristam.  ^  Cha,  and.     Also. 
12.     (Desire  and  Aversion  arise)  from  adristam  also.  —  252. 

'  Desire  and  version'  —  this  forms  the  complement  of  the  aphorism. 
Although  adristam  is  a  universal  cause,  still  particular  causality,  to 
wards  desire  and  aversion,  sometimes  attends  it.  For  instance,  it 
should  be  inferred  by  such  cases  as  of  desire  for  a  (mistress  or)  woman 
on  the  breaking  forth  of  youth  even  in  one  who  has  not  in  that  birth 
enjoyed  the  pleasures  of  love,  and  of  aversion  towards  snakes  even  in 
those  who  have  not  experienced  the  pain  of  snake-bites.  Nor  is  it  only 
samakdra  or  impression  produced  in  a  previous  existence  (that  is  to  say, 
instinct),  which  supplies  tlio  missing  link  in  these  cases.  For  there 
being  no  proof  for  the  supposition  of  its  existence,  or  for  thfc  supposi 
tion  'of  its  resuscitation,  the  supposition  of  adristam  becomes  neces 
sary.  —  12. 

Origin  of  desire  which,  beiny  a  fault,  is  an  accessory  to  adharma, 

continued. 
UpasMra.—'H.Q  mentions  another  contributory  cause  (of  desire  and  aversion)  : 

n  5  i  *  i  \\  \\ 


Rtaffit.  Jati-visesfit,  from  particularity  of  race   or  racial  distinc 
tion.  ^  Cha,  and. 

13.     (Desire  and  Aversion  arise)  also  from  racial    distinctions. 
—253. 

Thus,  human  beings  have  desire  for  rice,  etc.,  animals  of  the  deer 
class,  for  grass,  etc.  ;  those  of  the  camel  class,  for  briers.  In  these 
cases  also,  adristam  which  produces  birth  in  such  and  such  a  race,  is 
the  governing  principle,  while  race,  i.  e.,  distinction  of  birth,  is  only  a 
means  or  medium.  Similarly,  pigeons,  etc.,  possess  desire  for  crops. 
In  the  same  way,  animals  of  !the  buffalo  class  possess  aversion  towards 
the  horse  ;  dogs,  towards  the  jackal  ;  ichneumons,  towards  snakes  ;  and 
from  other  instances,  it  is  to  be  inferred  (that  racial  distinction  is  a 
means  of  desire  and  aversion).  —  13. 

Desire  and  aversion  produce  dharma  and   adharma  through  inclination. 

Upvskdra.—  Having  thus  enumerated  the   efficient   causes   of   desire   and  aversion,  desire 

and  aversion  being  the  efficient  causes   of   dharma  and  adharma,  he  now    points  out  that  the 

causality  of  fault  towards  dharma  and  adharma  operates  through  the  medium  of  activity   or 

'inclination. 


KANADA  SftTRAS  VI,  2,  15.  191 


I  R  I  *«  II 


Inhchha-dvesa-purvvika,  preceded  by,  or  having  for 
its  antecdents,  desire  and  aversion.  >iWrfcrRT*5i<|;f^r  :  Dharma-adharma- 
pravrittih,  Activity,  tendency,  inclination,  or  application  to  dharma 
and  adharma. 

14.  Application  to  dharma  and  adharma  has  for  its  antece 
dents  Desire  and  Aversion.  —  254. 

'  Pravrittih  '  or  employment  in  a  prescribed  action,  is  due  to  the 
link  of  desire,  and  in  a  prohibited  action,  e.  y.,  killing,  is  due  to  the  link 
of  aversion.  Employment,  due  to  the  link  of  desire,  in  sacrifices,  etc., 
begets  dharma;  employment,;due  to  the  link  of  aversion,  in  killing,  etc., 
begets  adharma.  These  same  desire  and  aversion  cause  the  wheel  of 
transmigration  to  revolve.  Accordingly  there  is  the  aphorism  of  Gau 
tama/'  Pravritli  or  employment  is  the  operation  or  exeratioii  of  speceh, 
mind,  and  body,"  (Nyaya-Sutram,  I.  i.  17).  Verbal  employment  is  exer 
tion  of  speech  ;  it  is  meritorious,  if  it  is  for  the  expression  of  what  is  true, 
kind,  and  beneficial  ;  it  is  sinful,  if  it  is  for  the  expression  of  what  is 
nature,  unkind,  and  baneful.  By  '  Buddhih/  (mind),  is  meant  that  by 
which  objects  are  cognised,  i.  e.,  mind.  Therefore  mental  employment 
is  compassion  towards  all  creatures,  and  other  activities.  Bodily 
employment,  such  as  almsgiving,  ministration,  etc.,  is  tenfold  as  sinful, 
and  tenfold  as  meritorious.  —  14. 

Vivriti.  —  The  aphorism  has  been  framed  in  a  general  way.  Hence 
no  harm  has  been  done  to  the  production  of  dharma,  etc.,  also  from 
chance  contact  with  the  water  of  the  Grafiga  (the  Granges)  and  such 
other  sources,  even  though  desire  and  aversion  do  not  exist  here. 

Dharma  and    adharma  are  causes  of  birth  and  death. 

Upaskdra.  —  Now  he  states  the  end  or   object  of  dharma   and  adharma,  ».  e.,  reappearance 
after  passing  away  : 


:  n  ^  i  ^  i  mi 

Tat-samyogah,     conjunction     produced    by     them. 
Vibhagah,  disjunction. 

15.  Conjunction  (of  soul  with  body,  sense,  and  life),  produced 
by  them  (i.e.,  dharma  ar.d  adharma),  (is  called  birth)  ;  Disjunc 
tion  (of  body  and  mind,  produced  by  them,  is  called  death).  —  255- 

From  these,  namely  dharma  and  adharma,  conjunction,  i.  e.,  birth, 
results.  Connection  with  non-pre-existing  body,  sense,  and  life  is  here 
termed  conjunction.  '  Vibhagah  '  again,  denotes  disjunction  of  body 
and  mind,  characterised  as  death.  The  meaning,  therefore,  is  that 
this  system  of  births  and  deaths,  samsdra  or  ceaseless  flow  of  existences, 
otherwise  termed  pretya-bhdva  or  re-appearance  after  passing  away,  ia 
caused  by  dharma  and  adharma.  The  Vedic  name  of  this  very  pretya- 
bhdva  is  ajarafijart-bhdva  or  uon-decrepit  decrepitude.  —  15. 


192  VAI^ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

How  moksa  is  attained. 

Upaskdra.  —  To  ascertain,   therefore,   what  moksa   is,  in   which   there  is    an   end   of   this 
re-appearance  after  passing  away,  of  the  system  of  births  and  deaths,  ho  says  : 


t  II  $  I  R  I  ?$  II 

Atma-karmmasu,  actions  of    the  soul    taking    place. 
Moksah,  salvation,     sqpjqTrT:  Vyakhyatah,  declared. 

16.  (It  has  been)  declared  that  the  actions  of  the  soul  taking 
place,  salvation  (results).  —  256. 

This  same  disjunction  of  body  and  mind  rises  into  mohsa  or  libera 
tion,  when  there  exist  the  actions  of  the  soul.  This  is  the  meaning. 
Now,  the  actions  of  the  soul  collectively  are  as  follows  :  'audition/ 
intellection,  practice  of  holy  communion,  or  yoga,  constant  meditation, 
posture,  regulation  of  breath,  (lit.  lengthening  of  life,  the  acquisition 
of  the  control  of  the  external  senses  and  of  the  control  of  the  internal 
sense,  spiritual  intuition  of  one's  own  soul  and  of  the  souls  of  others, 
accurate  knowledge  of  previously  produced  dharma  and  adharma, 
which  have  to  be  experienced  in  other  bodies  and  places  the  building 
up  of  various  bodies  suitable  to  such  experience,  the  exhaustion  of  that 
dharma  and  adharma  by  experiencing  them,  and  ultimate  success  or 
emancipation,  characterised  as  cessation  of  pain,  on  the  cessation  of 
bii  h,  when  there  is  cessation  of  tendency  to  action,  in  consequence  of 
the  non-production  of  subsequent  dharma  and  adharma,  due  to  the 
overcoming  of  the  mists  of  faults  characterised  as  desire  and  aversion. 
Of  these  the  prime  action  of  the  soul  is  knowledge  of  the  real  nature  or 
essence  of  the  six  Predicables.  —  16. 

Here  ends  the  second  chapter  of  the  sixth  book  in  the  Commentary 
of  £ankara  upon  the  Vaisesika  Aphorisms. 

Vivfiti.  —  Spiritual  intuition  of  the  reality  of  the  self  steals  away 
false  knowledge,  sprung  from  spiritual  blindness,  of  which  the  subject- 
matter  is  that  the  soul  is  not  distinct  from  the  body,  etc.  Thereupon 
there  is  cessation  of  faults,  characterised  as  desire  and  aversion  ;  from 
which  there  follows  destruction  of  activity  or  inclination  productive  of 
dharma  and  adharma.  And  from  the  non-existence  of  inclination  results 
annihilation  of  birth  in  the  form  of  the  initial  conjunction  of  lifeiwith  a 
future  body.  And  hence  there  results  final  annihilation  of  the  threefold 
afflictions.  It  is  in  this  that  moksa  consists.  Therefore  this  treatise  is 
useful,  as  a  system  of  thought  intended  for  the  purpose  of  intellection 
or  thinking  abont  things. 


KANiDA    SftTRAS  VII,  1,  2.  195 


BOOK  SEVENTH—  CHAPTER  FIRST- 

Allusion  to  I.  i.  6. 

Upaxkdra.  —  Having  examined  dharma  and  adharma,  as  the  root  oamei  of  Samidra  «r 
transmigration,  as  the  efficient  causes  of  all  that  has  a  production,  as  the  meana  of  bhoga  or 
worldly  experience,  and  as  uniformly  attaching  to  each  individual  soul,  from  their  origin,  as 
wall  as  the  adristam  of  others  as  conducive  to  fruits  to  be  experienced  by  those  others,  the 
(tiUhor  now  calls  back  to  the  mind  of  the  disciples  the  enumeration  and  definition  of  Attri 
butes  with  the  intention  of  examining  these  Attributes. 


:  Uktah,  stated,  mentioned,  enumerated.  *pm  '•  Gunah,  attributes. 
1.     Attributes  (have  been)  mentioned  (above).—  257. 

The  meaning  is  that  Attributes  have  been  enumerated  and  defined- 
Of  these  colour,  etc.,  seventeen  in  all,  have  been  verbally  stated,  and 
seven  have  been  brought  forward  by  the  word  cha,  l  and  '.  Accordingly 
all  the  twenty-four  Attributes  have  been  mentioned.  Now,  Attribute- 
ness  connotes  possession  of  the  l  class  '  directly  pervaded  by  existence 
appearing  in  eternals  present  in  the  eternals,  or  possession  of  the  'class' 
directly  pervaded  by  existence  appearing  in  eternals  which  do  not 
appear  in  combinative  causes,  or  possession  of  the  '  class  '  directly  per 
vaded  by  existence  appearing  in  eternals  appearing  in  non-combina 
tive  causes,  or  possession  of  the  '  class  '  not  appearing  in  action  which. 
does  not  co-exist  in  the  same  substratum  with  the  effect.  —  1. 

What  attributes  are  non-eternal. 

Upaskara.  —  'Now,  the  examination  of  Attributes,  as  Attributes,  is  the  subject  of  the  ••Tenth 
book.  Of  this,  in  the  first  Chapter,  there  are  five  sections,  viz.,  (1)  the  examination  of  Attri 
butes  as  eternal,  (2)  the  examination  of  Attributes  as  non-etenal,  (3)  the  examination  of  Attri 
butes  due  to  the  action  of  heat,  (4)  the  examination  of  Attributes  which  appear  of  function 
in  more  substances  than  one,  e.  g.,  Number,  etc.,  and  (5)  the  examination  of  measure  or  exten 
sion.  Herein  he  states  the  non-eternality  of  the  four  Attributes,  colour,  etc. 


I  VS  H  R  II 

Prithivi-adi-rupa-rasa-gandha-sparsah,  the 
Colour,  Taste  Smell,  and  Touch  of  Earth,  etc.,  L  o.,  of  Earth,  Water,. 
Fire,  and  Air.  5«nfrsrc*n^  Dravya-anityatvat,  on  account  of  the  non- 
eternality  of  the  substances  in  which  they  reside,  nfrtn:  Anityah,  non- 
eternal.  ^l  Cha,  also. 

2.  The  Colour,  Taste,  Smell,  and  Touch  of  Earth,  Water, 
Fire,  and  Air,  are  also  non-eternal,  on  account  of  the  non-eterna 
lity  of  their  substrata.  —  258. 

Of  the  wholes  made  up  of  parts,  beginning  with  Earth,  and  ending 
\vith  Air,  the  four  Attributes,  colour,  and  the  following,  are  non-eternal. 
Although  other  Attributes  also,  being  present  in  whole  made  up  of  parts, 
are  really  non-eternal,  yet  (they  are  not  referred  to  here,  because)  their 
destruction  is  also  due  to  other  causes.  The  four  Attributes,  beginning 
vrith  colour,  disappear  only  on  the  destruction  of  their  substrata,  and 


194  VAlSESIKA   PHILOSOPHY 


not  in  consequence  of  another,  aid  contradictory,  Attribute.  {  Dravya- 
anityatvat  :'  The  meaning  is  that  the  non-etertiality  of  the  dependent 
Attributes  is  on  account  of  the  uon-eternality  of  substances  upon  which 
they  depend.  —  2. 

What  attributes  are  eternal. 

Upask&ra.  —  If  the  non-eternality  of  substrata  governs  the  non-eternality  of  colour,  etc., 
then,  he  says,  it  is  obtained  from  necessary  implication,  that  those  colour,  etc.,  which  reside 
in  eternal  substrata,  possess  eternality. 


I  V9  \  \  I  ^  II 

Btena,  by  this.  f^T?^f  Nityesu,  in  eternals.  T?!^  Nityatvam,  eter 
nality.  3<E*^  Uktam,  stated.  Implied. 


3.     By  this  is  implied  eternality  (of  Colour,  etc.,  which  reside) 
in  eternal  substances.—  259. 

Of  the  same  four  Attributes,  colour,  etc.,  present  in  eternal  subs 
trata,  eternality  is  implied  '  by  this,'  which  means,  by  the  declaration 
of  non-eternality  by  reason  of  the  non-eternality  of  the  substrata. 


The  writer   of  the    Vfitti,    however,    explains  thus  : 


—this  is  the  reading,  with  the  addition  of  an  sr,  (so  that  instead  of 
'  eternality,'  the  reading  is  '  non-eternality.')  Thus,  colour,  etc.,  residing 
in  terrene  ultimate  atoms,  disappear  on  the  conjunction  of  fire.  —  3. 

Above  continued. 

Upxakdra.  —  Does,  then,  eternality  belong  also  to  colour,  etc.,  which  reside  in  terrene 
eternal  substances  ?  Accordingly  he  specifies  (the  eternals  referred  to  in  the  preceding 
aphorism). 


II  V9  I  $  I  8  II 

Apsu,  in  water.  ?fa%  Tejasi,  in  fire.  %\q\  Vayau,  in  air.  =g  Cha, 
and.  fr?n:  Nityalj,  eternal.  i[«^Pl9T^Ii^  Dravya-nityatvat,  in  consequence 
of  the  eternality  of  substrata. 

4.  And  also  in  consequence  of  the  eternality  of  their  (respec 
tive)  substrata,  (Colour,  etc.)  are  eternal  in  Water,  Fire,  and  Air. 
—260. 

In  aqueous  ultimate  atoms,  Colour,  Taste,  and  Touch  are  eternal  ; 
in  igneous  ultimate  atoms,  Colour  and  Touch  ;  in  ultimate  atoms  of  Air, 
Touch  is  eternal.  "  But,"  it  may  be  asked,  what  is  the  contradiction, 
if  colour,  etc.,  present  even  in  things  eternal,  be  themselves  non-eternal 
like  Sound,  Understanding,  etc.  V"  Accordingly,  an  additional  reason, 
viz.,  non-appearance  of  another  attribute  (vide  IV.  ii.  3  ante~),  is  indicat 
ed  by  the  word  xi,  '  and.'  For,  in  Sound,  the.  manifestation  of  a 
different  attribute  is  observed  in  the  form  of  tones,  high,  low,  etc.  ;  and 
in  knowledge,  etc.,  samskdra,  impression  or  habit,  etc.,  contradictory 
of,  or  which  oppose,  knowledge,  etc.,  (are  observed).  In  aqueous, 
igneous,  and  aerial  ultimate  atoms,  other  attributes,  contradictory  of 
colour,  etc.,  do  not  appear.  If  they  appeared,  then  Colour,  etc., 


KANiUA  SftTRAS  VII,  1,  6.  195 


heterogeneous  from  the  antecedent  ones,  would  be  observed  also  in  the 
aqueous  and  other  wholes  made  up  of  parts,  or  compounds,  originated 
by  the  same  ultimate  atoms,  in  the  order  of  binary  and  other  atomic 
aggregates.  But  colour,  different  in  kind  from  white  colour,  does  not 
belong  to  Water  and  Fire  ;  nor  do  Touches,  different  in  kind  from  cold 
and  hot  Touches.  "  Hot  water,"  "Cold  air/'  —  such  intuitions  are, 
however,  due  to  the  influence  of  upddhi  or  adjunct  or  external  coadi-  , 
tion.  This  is  the  import.  —  J. 

Vivriti.  —  "  But  Colour,  etc.,    residing    in    aqueous    ultimate    atoms, 
being    destructible    by  the    conjunction  of   fire/'    it    may    be    objected, 
why    this    generalisation,    namely,   "in    eternals  "  (in  tha    preceding 
aphorism)  '?"     Hence  he  specifies  the  eternals. 

The  meaning  is  that  Colour,  etc.,  inherent  in  the  eternal  earth  (  i.  e.f 
ultimate  atoms  of  earth),  are  not  certainly  eternal,  but  that  it  has  been 
stated  in  the  preceding  aphorism  that  those  only  are  eternal,  which  in 
here  in  the  eternal  Water,  Fire,  and  Air  (i.  e.,  aqueous,  igneous,  and 
aerial  ultimate  atoms). 

What  attributes  are  non-eternal. 

Upaskdra.—  'Already  it  has  been  stated  that  (Colour,  etc.,  are)  non-eternal  in  non- 
eternals  among  terrene  substances.  Now  he  states  it  ia  the  case  of  aqueous  other  non- 
oternals  also. 


-" 


II  VS  |  t  I  %  H 


Anityesu,    in    non-eternals,     srf^zns    Anityah,   non-eternal. 
—  Dravya-anityatvat,  in  consequence  of  the  non-eternality  of 


substrata. 

5.  In  non-eternals,  (Colour,  etc.,  are)  non-eternal,  in  conse 
quence  of  the  non-eternality  of  their  substrata.  —  261. 

The  meaning  is  that  Colour,  etc.,  of  aqueous,  and  other  wholes 
made  uo  of  parts,  disappear  only  on  the  dissolution  of  substrata,  but 
not  in  consequence  of  other,  contradictory,  attributes.  —  5. 

Vivriti.  —  Are  Attributes,  inhering  in  non-eternals,  and  other  than 
Colour,  etc.,  eternal  ?  If  so,  then  Conjunction,  etc.,  also  will  be  eternal. 
To  remove  this  apprehension,  he  says  : 

The  meaning  is  that  Attributes  which  exist  in  non-eternal  substan 
ces,  are,  all  of  them,  non-eternal,  because  their  substrata  are  non- 
eternal,  so  that  eternal  Attributes  do  not  at  all  exist  in  non-eternal 
substances. 

Colour,  etc.,  of  Earthy  produced  by  burning. 

Upaskdra.  —  In  earth,  appearing  in  the  form  of  wholes  made  up  of  parts,  (i.  e.,  in  terren* 
bodies),  also,  Colour,  etc.,  appear  and  disappear  only  on  the  conjunction  of  fire.  How, 
therefore,  are  they  destructible  only  by  the  destruction  of  their  substrata  ?  To  reraore  thit 
apprehension,  he  says  : 


i  \  i  ^  u 


196  VAI&E§IKA    PHILOSOPHY. 


:  —  Karana-guna-purvvakah,  preceded  by,  or  having  fo 


antecedents,  the  attributes  of    the    causes.  $fa«rt    Prithivjam,  in    earth. 
i^lTI*    Pakajah,    produced    by    burning.     Due    to    the    action    of   heat. 
Thermal. 

6.  In  Earth,  (Colour,  Taste,  Smell,  and  Touch)  have  for 
their  antecedents  (like)  attributes  in  (its  combinative)  causes,  (and 
are  also)  due  to  the  action  of  heat.  —  262. 

'  Pakajah  '  means  Colour,  Taste,  Smell,  and  Touch,  due  to  the 
action  of  heat,  <  Karana-guna-purvvakah'  means  preceded  by  the 
attributes  of  that,  e.  g.,  potsherds,  etc.,  which  is  the  combinative  caus& 
of  the  substratum  of  Colour,  e.  y.,  a  water-pot.  Thus,  the  Colour  of  the 
potsherd  is  the  non-combinative  cause  of  the  colour  of  the  water-pot, 
by  means  of  the  proximity  known  as  combination  in  the  same  object 
with  the  cause.  So  also  in  the  case  of  Taste,  etc.  Colour,  Taste,  Smell, 
and  Touch  possess  the  jdti  or  '  class'  directly  pervaded  by  attribute- 
ness  such  as  colourness,  etc. 

Objection,  —  Colourness,  which  is  nothing  but  apprehensibility  by 
the  eye,  is  the  udpdhi  or  external  condition  (of  colour-perception). 

Answer.  —  It  is  not.  For,  this  would  entail  non-appearance  of  the 
intuition  of  colour  immediately  on  the  falling  of  the  sense,  since  an 
U}>ddhi  or  external  condition  which  is  not  adjacent,  is  unfit  for  produc 
ing  the  intuition  of  that  which  is  conditioned  or  super-imposed.  Here 
the  itpddhij  again,  is  the  eye,  and  the  same—  the  ocular  sense  —  is 
supersensuous.  And  apprehensibility  is  the  being  the  object  of 
apprehension.  This  too  is  not  an  object  of  ocular  perception,  since 
perception  distinguished  or  determined  by  colour-ness  is  ocular. 
Colour-ness,  therefore,  is  the  characteristic  of  the  attribute  perceptible 
by  the  external  sense  of  the  eye  alone. 

Ob  j  notion.  —  But  it  does  not  pervade  or  include  supersensuous  colour. 

Answer.  —  The  objection  does  not  arise  ;  for,  the  possession  of  the 
jdti  or  class  apprehensible  by  the  external  sense  of  the  eye  alone,  is 
intended.  Such  jdti  is  colour-ness  ;  as  also  are  blue-ness,  etc. 

Objection.  —  The  manifestations  of  blue,  yellow,  etc.,  are  eternal, 
only  as  each  of  them  is  a  single,  individual,  manifestation.  There  are 
not  blue-ness,  and  other  classes,  inasmuch  as  their  denotation  is  a  single 
individual. 

Answer.  —  This  is  not  the  case,  as  it  would  entail  the  non-appearance 
of  the  intuition  of  deeper  blue,  deepest  blue,  etc. 

Objection.  —  But  the  use  of  the  comparative  and  the  superlative  may 
be  caused  here  by  the  absence  of  inter-penetration  of  whiteness,  etc- 

Answer.  —  It  cannot,  since  there  is  no  proof  of  it,  and  also  because 
01  the  intuition,  "  Dark  colour  is  gone,  red  produced." 

Ob  j  action.  —  But  such  intuition  is  caused  by  the  produc  ion  and 
destruction  of  combination. 


K  AN£DA  SUTRAS  vn,  i, «.  197 


Answer. — No,  since  there  is  no  trace  of  combination  there,  and 
since  combination  is  eternal.  The  same  (*'.  e.,  production  and  destruc 
tion  of  combination)  being  applicable  also  in  the  case  of  the  non- 
eternality  of  the  water-pot,  etc.,  the  result  would  be  non-finality,  since 
AnyathAgiddhit  production  by  other  means,  or  plurality  of  causes,  can 
be  easily  ascribed  there  by  way  of  the  very  non-eternality  of  com 
bination. 

Another  objection. — The  attributes,  blue,  yellow,  etc.,  are  not 
different  from  substance,  since  there  is  no  difference  between  a  property 
and  that  of  which  it  is  a  property. 

Answer. — -This  cannot  be  the  case,  as  it  would  entail  such  uses  as 
"  Colour  is  water-pot,"  "  Toucth  is  water-pot,"  etc. 

Objection. — But  there  is  no  harm  in  it,  inasmuch  as  there  are  really 
such  intuitions  as  "  White  cloth,"  "  Blue  cloth,"  etc. 

Answer. — -The  analogy  does  not  hold,  because  the  intuitions  are 
•explained  by  the  supposition  of  elision  of  the  affix,  matup,  denoting 
possession,  or  by  the  supposition  of  transference  of  identity. 

Objection. — This  supposition  would  be  somewhat  probable,  were 
there  proof  of  difference. 

Answer. — But  difference  is  proved  by  means  of  such  predication  as 
-'  Colour  of  s-.i  idal-wood,"  "  Smell  of  sandal-wood,"  etc.  If  the  cloth 
were  identical  with  colour,  then,  like  the  cloth,  colour  also  would  be 
perceived  by  the  sense-organ  of  the  skin,  and  being  asked  to  bring  the 
colour,  one  would  bring  some  substance  whatever. 

Objection. — Let,  then,  there  be  identity  in  difference,  seeing  that 
in  the  case  of  absolute  difference  as  well  as  of  absolute  identity,  co 
existence  in  the  same  substratum  would  not  be  possible. 

Answer. — -This  cannot  be,  for  it  is  impossible  for  identity  and  differ 
ence,  which  are  contradictory  to  each  other,  to  appear  together  in  the 
same  place,  without  the  difference  of  their  situation. 

Objection. — But  the  characteristic  of  mutual  non-existence  (or  non- 
existence  which  is  the  counter-opposite  of  identity,  e.  g.y  a  waterpot  ia 
not  a  cloth)  a  ipears  in  that  which  appears  in  what  is  not  pervaded  or 
included,  since  it  is  the  characteristic  of  being  the  property  of  that 
svhich  appears  in  eternal  non-existence,  like  the  characteristic  of 
absolute  non-existence  (or  non-existence  which  is  the  counter-opposite 
of  connection  with  the  past,  the  present,  and  the  future,  e.  g.,  there  is 
no  waterpot  inside  the  earth). 

Answer. — This  is  not  the  case.  For,  in  virtue  of  the  intuition  of 
conjunction  and  its  absolute  non-existence,  the  characteristic  of  appear 
ing  in  that  which  is  not  pervaded,  is  observed  of  absolute  non-existence, 
but,  in  the  case  of  mutual  non-existence,  such  intuition  does  not  exist. 

Now,  this  colour  is  of  various    kinds  in  Earth  ;  in  Water    and    Fire 
it    is    only    white.     Sometimes  there  is  one  more  colour,  i.  e.,  variegated 
or  compound  colour,  also  in  a  cloth,  etc. ;  for,  otherwise,  they  would   net 
be  objects  of  visual  perception,  since  only  substances    possessing  colour 
oan  be  objects  of  perception  by  the  eye. 


1&8  VAlSESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

Objection. — -But  there  can  be  no  origination  of  colour  by  heteroge 
neous  colours. 

Answer. — This  is  not  the  case  ;  for,  homogeneity,  only  as  constituted 
by  the  characteristic  of  being  colour,  is  required  in  the  origination  of 
blue,  yellow,  etc.,  since  otherwise,  as  has  been  already  stated,  they 
would  not  be  objects  of  visual  perception. 

Objection. — But  the  apprehension  of  the  colour  of  a  whole  made  up 
of  parts  is  possible  by  means  of  the  apprehension  of  the  colours  of  those 
parts. 

Answer. — It  is  not,  as  it  would  entail  that  the  parts  also,  possessing 
variegated  or  compound  colour,  are  themselves  void  of  colour.  More 
over,  wherever,  in  consequence  of  the  action  of  heat,  variegated  colour 
appears  in  ultimate  atoms,  there  also  variegated  colour  is  produced  in 
the  cloth,  etc.,  originated  by  them  successively. 

Objection. — In  the  yellow  rnyrobalan,  then,  taste  also  is  variegated. 

Answer . — No,  for  no  harm  would  be  done,  even  if  the  yellow  inyro- 
balan  were  void  of  taste.  The  tradition  of  six  tastes,  however,  is  due 
to  the  causality  which  produces  the  effects  or  properties  of  those 
tastes. 

Similarly,  smell  also  is  not  variegated,  since  a  fragrant  and  a  non- 
fragrant  part  are  not  its 'originators. 

Objection — In  the  parts  of  a  karkatl  or  cucumber,  there  is  sometimes 
bitterness,  and  sometimes  sweetness.  Which  taste,  then,  exists  in 
karkatt  ? 

Answer. — Only  sweetness. 

Objection. — There  existing  a  conflict  of  attributes,  how  can  it 
be  so  ? 

Answer. — On  account  of  the  non-existence  of  bitterness  in  the  parts 
thereof. 

Objection. — How,  then,  does  such  sensation  (of  bitterness)  arise  ? 

Answer. — It  arises  from  the  bitter  taste  of  the  bilious  substance 
existing  at  the  tip  of  the  tongue  irritated  by  the  eating  of  the  karkati. 
It  is  from  this  cause  that  sometimes  the  mouth  also  becomes  bitter. 

Objection. — But  how  does  not  this  explanation  apply  in  the  case  of 
the  yellow  myrobalan  also  ? 

Answer. — Because,  in  the  parts  of  the  yellow  myrobalan,  various 
tastes  are  felt,  e.  g.,  sour,  sweet,  salt,  etc.  There  is  no  need  of  further 
Argumentation  or  elaboration. 

And  this  colour  is  an  auxiliary  to  the  eye. 

Objection. — Such  being  the  case,  how  do  the  non-existence  of  Colour 
In  air,  and  darkness  become  objects  of  ocular  perception  ? 

Answer. — The  question  does  not  arise,  since  colour  is  an  auxiliary 
to  the  eye  in  the  apprehension  only  of  existences  or  objective  realities- 


KANlDA  SUTRAS  VII,  1,  6. 


The  colours  of  all  the    three,   viz.,  the  object,  the  light,  and  the  eye,  are 
exciting  causes  of  ocular  perception. 

Taste,  again,  is  that  which  possesses  the  jdti  or  '  class,'  taste- 
ness.  Taste-ness  is  the  jdti  or  i  class  '  which  is  the  object  of  immediate 
cogaition  producible  by  the  sense  taste  aloae.  And  the  possession  of 
such  a  jdti  or  '  class  '  is  taste-ness.  It  is  this,  the  source  of  vitality, 
growth,  strength,  and  health,  that  is  a:i  auxility  to  the  tongue.  Thus, 
taste-ness  being  possession  of  the  jdti  or  '  class  '  pervaded  by  attribute- 
ness  capable  of  being  apprehended  by  the  organ  of  the  tongue,  there  is 
no  non-pervasion,  i.  e.,  exclusion,  of  super-sensuous  taste. 

Attribute,  apprehensible  by  the  nose  alone,  is  Smell.  Smell-ness  is 
the  possession  oc  the  jdti  or  l  class'  pervaded  by  attribute-ness  appre 
hensible  by  the  nose  only.  It  is  two-fold,  being  fragrant  and  non- 
fragrant.  Or  Sruell-ness  denotes  the  possession  of  the  jdti  or  '  class  ' 
directly  pervaded  by  attribute-ness  appearing  only  in  that  which  is 
present  in  Earth. 

In  like  manner,  Touch  also  is  the  attribute  possessing  the  jdti  or 
*  class,'  touch-ness.  Touch-ness  denotes  the  possession  of  the  jdti  or 
4  class  '  directly  pervaded  by  attribute-ness  apprehensible  by  the  organ 
of  the  skin  only.  Inhering  in  the  quartet  of  substances,  (namely,  Earth, 
Water,  Fire,  Air),  it  is,  again,  three-fold,  according  to  the  differences 
of  neither  hot  nor  cold,  cold,  and  hot. 

Now,  in  passing,  the  process  due  to  the  action  of  heat,  is  considered. 
Here,  according  to  those  who  hold  the  theory  of  the    burning  of  an  ear- 
thenpot  (as  a  whole),  the  whole  of    the    effect    and    the    cause    is    burnt. 
Those  who  hold  the  theory  of  the  burning  of  the  ultimate  atoms  (consti 
tuting   the    whole),    maintain    that    it  is    the    ultimate  atoms  which  are 
separately  burnt,  that  it  is  in  them  that  there  take  place  destruction  of 
the  previous  colour  and    production    of  the  succeeding    colur,    etc.,  and 
that,  following  the  course  of  the  attribute  of   the    cause,  colour,  etc.,  are 
produced  in  the  burnt  (wholes  made  up  again)    of  (burnt)    parts.     Hera 
the  sense  is  as  follows  :      From  the    impulse  or  the  impact,  given  by  fire, 
to  a  raw  substance,  e.  g.,  a  water-pot,  etc.,  thrown  in  a  kiln,  disjunction, 
which  is  the  counter-opposite  of  conjunction  originative    of  a  compound 
substance,  appears  among  the  ultimate  atoms    originative    of   that    raw 
substance,    and    on    the    destruction    of    originative  conjunction  by  the 
disjunction,  destruction  of  the    substance    must    take    place.     For,    it  is 
seen  that  of  rice,  etc.,  placed  in  a  pan,    destruction  takes  place    at  once 
from  frying,  only  by  the  application  of  heat  from  below,  arid  that,  (under 
similar  conditions)  intense  ebullition  takes  place  in  milk,  water,  and  the 
like.     Therefore,  it  is  hoping    too    much   that    substances,    smitten  with 
flames  of  fire  on  all  sides,  in  a  kiln,  will     endure.     Moreover,  if  there  be 
no  destruction  of    substances,  then    burning  at  their    centre    will  not  be 
possible.     For,    there    is    no    possibility    of    conjunction    of    fire    at  the 
centre  which  is  enclosed  with  harder    other  constituent    parts.     So  that 
there    will    be  this  great    incongruity  that  the    parts  are    dark  but    the 
whole  made  up  of  those  parts  is  red. 

Objection. — Substances  which  are    wholes  made  up  of  parts,  are  cer 
tainly  porous.     H)W,  otherwise,    can  oil,    clarified    butter,    etc.,  poured. 


200  VAlSE§IK A  PHILOSOPHY. 


into  a  jar,  etc.,  ooze  out,  and  how  also    can  these  be  boiled  ?     Hence,  at 
the  centre  also,  there  can  be  conjunction  of  fire. 

Answer. — This  cannot  be,  inasmuch  as,  on  account  of  exclusion  of 
ponderable  or  corporal  or  dense  substances  in  virtue  of  the  property  of 
impenetrability,  conjunction  of  fire  is  impossible  at  the  centr*  which 
is  already  conjoined  with  other  (constituent^  parts. 

Objection. — If  there  is  destruction  of  the  substance,  how,  then,  can 
there  be  the  recognition,  "  This  is  that  very  water-pot  ?"  How,  again r 
in  all  changes  of  conditions,  in  the  kiln,  etc.,  are  the  water-pot,  etc., 
observed  in  one  and  the  same  form  '?  How  is  it  that  a  pan,  a  plate, 
etc.,  placed  on  the  burning  water-pot,  etc.,  are  observed  in  the  same- 
position  ?  For  they  should  fall  down  on  the  dissolution  of  the  water- 
pot,  etc.  How,  again,  are  exactly  the  same  number  of  wholes  as  are 
placed  in  the  furnace,  afterwards  obtained  from  it  ?  For,  during  the 
process  of  burning,  the  origination  is  possible,  of  more  or  less  substan 
ces,  by  the  (dissolved)  ultimate  atoms,  in  the  order  of  binary  and  other 
atomic  aggregates.  How,  again,  are  water-pot,  etc.,  of  exactly  the 
same  dimensions,  observed  to  come  out  from  the  furance?  How,  again,, 
will  not  the  marks  of  lines  and  prints  be  obliterated  ?  Burning,  there 
fore,  takes  place  only  in  the  wholes. 

Answer. — Such  is  not  the  case.  For  disjunction  of  three  or  four 
tertiary  atomic  aggregates  being  effected  from  a  water-pot,  etc.,  with 
the  point  of  a  needle,  there  being  destruction  of  substance  as  a  whole 
in  consequence  of  the  destruction  of  conjunction  originative  of  subs 
tance,  all  such  contradictions  appear  in,  or  are  explained  on,  both  the 
theories.  For,  even  they  who  hold  the  theory  of  the  burning  of  the 
water-pot  as  a  whole,  cannot  venture  to  say  that  substance  as  a  whole- 
is  not  destroyed  in  the  case  of  the  above  instance. 

Even  in  that  case  the  water-pot,  etc.,  are  not  destroyed,  since  it  i* 
possible  for  an  effect  to  continue  to  exist  by  inhering  in  the  remaining 
constituent  parts  even  when  there  has  been  destruction  of  some  cons- 
"tituent  parts.  Were  it  not  so,  recognition,  etc.,  would  be  really 
impossible.  This  is  the  view  of  the  Mimdmsakas.  But  they  should  be 
asked  ;  how  the  water-pot,  etc.,  bearing  relation  to  the  situation  or 
arrangement  of  all  the  constituent  parts,  can  appear  in  a  smaller  num 
ber  of  consituent  parts.  If  it  be  their  reply  that  it  is  possible  in  the 
same  way  as  is  possible  contraction  of  measure  or  extension  or  quantit 
in  a  cloth  which  is  not  yet  destroyed  ;  we  reply  that  there  can  be  no  such 
analogy,  for  there  is  no  observation  of  contraction  and  expansion  in 
the  case  of  wood,  stone,  pillar,  earthen  jar,  etc.,  made  up  of  harder 
constituent  parts.  It  cannot  be  rejoined  by  th«m  that  what  is  said  to 
destroy  the  water-pot,  etc.,  destroys  only  its  measure  or  extension  ; 
for,  measure  or  extension  can  be  destroyed  only  by  the  destruction 
of  its  substratum.  Moreover,  like  the  recognition  of  the  water-pot, 
etc.,  measure  or  extension  also  is  recognised  in  the  case  of  the  needle- 
scratch,  whereas  in  their  view  its  destruction  also  is  impossible.  This- 
is  the  point. 

On  the  theory  of  those  who  hold  that  disjunction  which  is  the 
counteropposite  of  conjunction  originative  of  substance  aa  well  as 
disjunction  which  is  not  its  counter-opposite,  are  produced  by  one  and 


KANADA  StiTRAS  VII,  1,  6.  201 


the  same  action  in  the  constituent  part,  there  is  production  of  red 
colour,  etc.,  at  the  ninth  moment  counting  from  the  destruction  of  the 
binary  atomic  aggregate,  in  another  binary  atomic  aggregate,  since 
action  is  conceived  to  exist  in  the  very  same  ultimate  atom.  Thusr 
there  is  first  action  in  the  ultimate  atom  originative  of  the  binary 
atomic  aggregate,  from  the  impulse  given  by  fire;  then,  disjunc 
tion  :  then  destruction  of  conjunction  originative  of  substance  ;  thenr 
destruction  of  the  binary  atomic  aggregate  ;  then,  in  consequence  of 
conjunction  of  fire,  disappearance  of  dark  colour,  etc.,  from  the  pure 
or  singly  existing  ultimate  atom,  after  the  destruction  of  the  binary 
atomic  aggregate  ;  after  destruction  of  dark  colour,  etc.,  production  of  red 
colour,  etc.,  from  another  conjunction  of  fire  ;  after  production  of  red 
colour,  etc.,  cessation  of  action  in  the  ultimate  atom  ;  following  it, 
action  in  the  ultimate  atom,  from  conjunction  of  soul  possessing  adrist- 
am  or  destiny  ;  then,  disjunction  ;  then,  cessation  of  previous  conjunc 
tion,  originative  of  substance,  with  another  ultimate  atom;  then, 
production  of  the  binary  atomic  aggregate  ;  after  the  production  of  the 
binary  atomic  aggregate,  production  of  red  colour,  etc.,  in  the  pro 
gressive  order  of  the  attribute  of  the  cause-  These  are  the  nine  moments, 
if  a  different  action  is  produced  just  at  the  moment  of  the  cessation  of 
the  previous  actioii.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  a  different  action  is  pro 
duced  not  at  the  moment  of  the  cessation  of  the  previous  action,  then 
there  are  ten  moments.  Even  if  disjunction,  etc.,  produced  by  disjunc 
tion,  be  admitted,  still  there  are  ten  moments,  if  disjunction  produced  by 
disjunction  has  reference  to  the  time  in  which  destruction  of  conjunc 
tion  originative  of  substance  takes  place.  If,  on  the  other  hand  disjunc 
tion  produces  another  disjunction  with  reference  to  the  time  in  which 
destruction  of  substance  takes  place,  then  there  are  eleven  moments 
in  the  process.  Thus,  destruction  of  the  binary  atomic  aggregate 
and  disjunction  produced  by  disjunction,  at  one  moment;  then,  destruc 
tion  of  previous  conjunction,  and  cessation  of  drak  colour,  etc.  ; 
subsequent  conjunction  and  production  of  red  colour,  etc.  ,  cessation 
of  disjunction  produced  by  disjunction  and  of  action,  by  means  of 
subsequent  conjunction  ;  then,  action  in  the  ultimate  atom,  favourable 
to  origination  of  substance,  disjunction  from  action  ;  cessation  of 
previous  conjunction  from  disjunction  ;  thence,  conjunction  originative 
of  substance;  thence  production  of  substance  ;  production  of  red  colour, 
etc.,  in  the  produced  substance.  These  are  the  ten  moments.  Where 
however,  production  of  disjunction  by  disjunction  depends  upon  the 
passing  of  the  time  containing  the  destruction  of  substance,  there  are, 
by  the  increase  of  one  moment,  eleven  moments.  Thus,  destruction'of  subs 
tances;  then  disjunction  produced  by  disjunction  and  cessation  of  dark 
colour,  etc.;  then  subsequent  conjunction  and  production  of  red  colour,  etc. 
then  cessation  of  disjunction  produced  by  disjunction  and  of  action;  then 
action  in  the  ultimate  atom,  favourable  to  the  origination  of  substance  ; 
then  disjunction  ;  cessation  of  previous  conjunction  ;  production  of 
conjunction  originative  of  substance  ;  production  of  the  binary  atomic 
aggregate  ;  production  of  red  colour,  etc.  These  are  the  eleven  moments. 
•Such  is  the  process  on  the  conception  of  action  and  cessation  of  action 
in  one  and  the  same  ultimate  atom.  If  action  favourable  to  the  origi 
nation  of  substance  is  conceived  to  take  place  in  a  different  ultimate 
atom,  then  the  production  of  red  colour,  etc.,  should  be  understood  to 


202  VAlSESAIAK  PHILOSOPHY. 


appear  at  the  fifth,  sixth,  seventh,  or  eighth  moment  commencing  from 
destruction  of  the  binary  atomic  aggregate.  The  same  has  been  ex 
plained  in  Kandda-Rahaxyam.  —  6. 

Colour,  etc.,  of  Earth,  produced  by  burning,  continued. 

UpaskAra.  —  In  order  to  establish  that  the    Colour,  etc.,    of  terrene    ultimate    atoms   have 
conjunction  of  fire  as  their  non-combinative  cause,  he  says  : 


I  V9  I  {  |  V9  II 

Eka-dravya-tvat,  Because  of  the  characteristic   of  inher 
ing  in  one  substance. 

7.     Because  their  substratum  is  the  same.  —  263. 

The  expression,  "  of  (attributes)  produced  from  burning,"  is  the 
complement  of  the  aphorism.  "  Being  attributes,"  and  "  being  effects," 
are  also  intended  here.  The  whole  sentence,  therefore,  means  :  Colour, 
etc.,  of  terrene  ultimate  atoms,  have  conjunction  for  their  non-combi 
native  cause,  inasmuch  as  these,  being  product-attributes,  are  at  the 
same  time  non-abhorrent  or  incongruent  attributes  inhering  in  eternals, 
like  Sound,  and  like  Understanding,  etc.  Or  the  sddhya,  or  what  has 
to  be  proved,  is  merely  the  characteristic  of  being  produced  from  con 
junction.  Hence  there  is  no  undue  extension  to,  or  inclusion  of.  Sound 
produced  from  disjunction,  since  conjunction  of  Air  is  the  efficient 
cause  of  all  Sounds  whatever.  And  from  the  observation  of  the  pre 
sence  and  absence  of  fire  in  relation  to  them,  the  non-combinative 
causality  of  conjunction  of  fire,  towards  terrene  colour,  etc-,  is  proved 
by  the  force  of  2^aksa-dharmatd  i.  e.,  the  characteristic  of  the  vydpya  or 
the  middle  term,  the  mark  of  inference,  existing  in  the  paTcsa  or  the 
subject  of  the  conclusion-  —  7- 

VivTiti.  —  The  question  may  arise;  how  the  attributes  of  the  cause, 
as  they  do  not  exist  in  the  effect,  can  be  productive  of  the  attributes  of 
the  effect,  when  there  is  thus  a  difference  of  substrata.  Apprehending 
this,  he  says  : 

Because  they  have  one  substance  as  their  substratum,  that  is  to  say, 
because  there  is  co-existence  in  the  same  substratum.  Thus,  even 
though  the  attributes  of  the  cause  do  not  exist  -in  the  effect  by  the 
relation  of  immediate  combination,  yet,  inasmuch  as  they  exist  in  the 
effect  by  the  relation  of  co-existence  in  the  same  substratum  in  the 
form  of  combination  with  that  which  is  in  combination  with  them,  their 
productiveness  of  the  attributes  of  the  effect  is  not  unproved.  This  is 
the  import. 

Non-cognition  of  Minuteness  and  cognition  of  Magnitude, 
explained  before. 

Upaskdra.—  Having  elucidated  Colour,  Taste,  Smell,  and  Touch,  by  long  discourses,  and 
going  to  begin  first  the  examination  of  Measure  of  Extension,  in  violation  of  the  order  of 
enumeration  (of  the  Attributes),  following  the  maxim*  of  the  needle  and  the  kettle,  inasmuch 
as  Measure  of  Extension  is  proved  by  co  union  consent,  whereas  there  is  a  wide  range  of 
divergent  views  on  the  question  of  Number,—  «he  says  : 

*  The  maxim  of  the  needle  and  the  kettle  is  that  when  a  man  has  got  to  turn  out  a  needle 
and  a  kettle,  he  first  makes  the  needle,  the  smaller  and  easier  piece  of  work,  and  then  devotes 
his  whole  attention,  energy,  and  time  to  the  manufacture  of  the  kettle,  th«  l»rg«  and  more 
difficult  piece  of  work. 


KANlDA  SfiTRAS  VII,  1,  8.  203 


II  V9  |  ?  (  c;  || 

ft:  Anoh,  of  the  atom  or  atomic.  J?f?r :  Mahatah,  of  the  molecular 
or  the  dense  or  the  extended.  ^  Cha,  and.  ^T^svqgqtTs^  Upalabdhi-anu- 
palabdhi,  cognition  and  non-cognition.  f?R^  Nitye,  in  (the  book  treating 
of)  the  eternal.  s^TS^n^  Vyakhyate,  explained. 

8.  Cognition  and  non-cognition  of  the  atomic  and  the  extend 
ed  or  massive,  respectively,  have  been  explained  in  (the  fourth 
book  treating  of)  the  eternal. — 264. 

The  term,  l  in  the  eternal/  signifies  the  fourth  book,  demonstrative 
of  the  eternal,  i.  e.,  the  container,  by  the  contained.  l  Cognition  and 
non-cognition  '  :  The  application  (  of  these  words  )  will  be  according  to 
relevancy,  01  the  maxim.,  "  When  one  thing  is  relevant  to  another,  it 
belongs  to  that  other,  even  though  lying  at  a  distance."  So  that  the 
proposition,  "Non-cognition  of  the  atomic"  is  obtained.  In  like 
manner,  in  the  perceptual  cognition,  therefore,  namely,  "  l&rge, 
blue  jug/'  Measure  or  Extension  also  is  as  much  an  object  (of 
perception)  as  blue  colour.  And  by  means  of  this  Measure  or 
Extension,  Measure  or  Extension  terminating  in  the  ultimate 
atom,  is  inferred,  as  also  from  Substance-ness.  Moreover,  n  the 
perceptibility  of  Substance,  Measure  or  Extension  also  is  a  cause, 
like  colour  ;  for,  without  magnitude,  substance  cannot  be  perceptible. 
It  is,  therefore,  ascertained  that,  as  being  a  cause  of  the  perceptibility 
of  Substance,  and  being  itself  perceptible,  an  attribute,  called  Measure 
or  Extension,  exists.  For,  were  the  distinctive  form  of  a  water-pot, 
etc.,  its  Measure  or  Extension,  a  man  would  bring  any  water-pot, 
when  he  was  told  to  bring  *Tf^  >  the  massive  or  the  extended,  and  thus 
there  would  be  a  contradiction  between  the  order  of  the  master  and 
the  apprehension  of  it  by  the  servant.  Likewise  from  the  term  water- 
pot,  Measure  or  Extension  would  be  understood,  or  from  the  term, 
Measure  or  Extension,  a  water-pot. 

Measure  or  Extension  is  the  non-common  or  specific  cause  of  the 
usage  or  application  of  measures,  or  a  universal  attribute  inhering  in 
the  object  which  is  the  cause  of  the  perceptual  cognition  of  Substance. 
Application  of  measures  is  the  application  of  cubits,  etc.,  but  not  the 
application  of  weights,  numbers,  etc.,  This  Measure  or  Extension  is. 
of  four  kinds,  namely,  Largeness,  Smallness,  Length,  and  Shortness. 
Of  thesr,  extreme  largeness  and  extreme  lenght  exist  in  the  four 
1  universals  '  (i.  e.,  Space,  Time,  Ether,  and  Soulj  ;  extreme  smallnsss- 
and  extreme  shortness  exist  in  the  ultimate  atoms  ;  the  next  (higher) 
degree  of  smallness  and  shortness  exists  in  binary  atomic  aggregates; 
largeness  and  length  exist  in  substances  from  tertiary  atomic  aggrega 
tes  upwards  to  composite  wholes  (or  compound  bodies  as  they  exist  in 
nature).  In  this  manner,  all  substances  whatever  possess  two  Measures 
or  Extensions.  The  attribution  of  smallness  to  a  vilva  or  a  bael  fruit, 
dmalaka  (phylanthus  emblica'),  etc.,  and  of  shortness  to  fuel-sticks,  etc., 
is  relative.  And  relativity  here  denotes  non-existence  of  bulkiness. 
The  bulkiness  that  exists  in  the  dmalaka  (emblic  myrobalan),  does  not 
exist  in  the  jujube  ;  the  bulkiness  that  exists  in  the  wilva,  does  not  exist 
in  the  dmalaka.  It  is  this  bulkiness,  which  is  the  denotation  of  the- 


204  VAI&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


terra,    relativity,    inasmuch     as    it  partakes     of    both  the  primary  and 
secondary  uses. 

Some  maintain  that  length  and  shortness  do  not  exist  in  the 
eternal  substances.  Others  hold  that  these  are  not  even  modes  of 
Measure  or  Extension  ;  for,  what  they  mean  is  this  :  As  in  the  com 
mand,  "  Bring  the  longer  ones  from  amongst  these  bodies,"  so  also  in 
the  command,  "  Bring  the  spherical  and  the  triangular  ones  from 
amongst  these  bodies,"  discrimination  boing  equally  possible,  spheri 
city  or  roundness,  etc.,  also  could  then  have  |to  be  admitted  as  modes 
of  Measure  or  Extension. — 3. 

Largeness  or  magnitude  how  produced. 
Upaskdra. — -Ho  now  enumerates  the  causes  of  measure  or  extension. 


II  vs  i  ?  i  s.  ii 

Karaua-vahutvat,    from    a    multiplicity    of  causes.     ^ 
Cha,  also. 

9.     Largeness  or  Magnitude  is  produced,    from  a    multiplicity 
of  causes  also. — 265. 

The  word  '  cha  '  implies  the  addition  of  magnitude  and  pracliaya 
i.  e.j  loose  conjunction  among  parts.  "  Measure  or  extension  is  pro 
duced  " — this  is  the  complement  of  the  aphorism.  Among  these, 
multiplicity  of  causes  alone  produces  largeness  or  magnitude  and 
length  in  tertiary  atomic  aggregates,  since  magnitude  and  accretion 
do  not  exist  in  their  causes.  That  multiplicity  is  produced  by  the 
relative  understanding  of  God,  and  the  apprehension  of  particular 
adr*stam  or  destinies,  determines  this  plurality  of  objects  in  such  rela 
tive  understanding.  Likewise,  it  will  be  stated  hereafter,  duality 
existing  in  two  atoms  is  productive  of  measure  or  extension  in  a  binary 
atomic  aggregate.  In  a  piece  of  cloth,  originated  by  two  non-coales- 
cent  threads,  it  is  magnitude  alone  which  is  the  non-combinative 
cause,  since  multiplicity  and  coalescence  do  not  exist  there.  Where 
again,  a  ball  of  cotton,  in  this  case,  inasmuch  as  an  increase  of 
measure  or  extension  is  observed,  therefore  accretion  is  the  cause, 
since  multiplicity  does  no!;  exist,  and  since  magnitude  though  existing, 
is  not  a  condition  or  occasion  for  increase  of  measiire  or  extension. 
Such  being  the  case,  were  magnitude  cause  here,  there  would  be  no 
defect  in  the  argument,  for  it  has  been  said,  "  By  two,  by  one,  or 
by  all." 

Prachaya,  coalescence  or  accretion,  is  originative  conjunction, 
and  is  defined  as  conjunction  in  an  object  of  some  of  its  constituent 
parts  towards  itself,  in  which  object  some  of  the  constituent  parts 
were  not  in  conjunction  towards  itself.  And  this  conjunction  of  cons 
tituent  parts,  it  has  been  observed,  is  dependent  upon  a  loose  con 
junction  among  their  own  constituent  parts,  is  productive  of  measure 
or  extension,  and  is  involved  in  the  origination  of  Attributes  and 
Actions. — 9. 


KANlDA  SftTRAS  VII,  1,  11.  205 

The  atomic  is  the  opposite  of  the  large  or  massive  ;  the  short,  of  the  long. 

Upaslcdra.  —  Having  demonstrated  magnitude  and  length,  he  now  demonstrates  atomic-ness 
or  minuteness. 


u  vs  i  ?  i  ?o  n 

^ 

?RT:  Atah,  of  this.  f^nrftf  Viparitam,  the  contrary.  ?fqj  Arm,  the  atomic, 
small,  or  minute. 

10.     The  contrary  of  this  is  the  atomic.  —  266. 

'  Atah/  i.  e.,  from  large  or  massive  measure  or  extension  estab 
lished  by  perception  ;  '  viparitam/  (i.  e.,  divergent).  The  meaning  is 
that  that  is  atomic  measure  or  extension.  The  contrariety  arises  from 
imperc'eptibility,  and  from  contrariety  of  causes  also.  For  in  the  case 
of  magnitude  or  massiveness,  magnitude,  multiplicity,  and  accretion 
are  the  causes,  while  in  the  case  of  atomic-ness  or  minuteness,  duality 
inhering  in  the  cause  and  produced  by  the  relative  understanding  of 
God.  is  the  cause.  By  this  is  also  to  be  understood  that  the  contrary 
of  length  is  shortness,  and  here  too  the  contrariety  is  as  afore 
said.  —  10. 

In  ichat  sense  the  same  thing  appears  both  small  and  large. 

Upaskdra.  —  He  now  shows  that  in  the  case   of  a  jujube,   an   dmalaka,   etc.,  the   attribu 
tion  of  smallness  is  secondary  or  relative 


v» 

^Tirr  Anu,  atomic,  small,  minute.  JTfc^  Mahat,  large,  massive.  f[f?T  Iti, 
such,  rfft1!^  Tasmin,  in  that,  i.  e.,  in  respect  of  one  and  the  same  object1 
fe^nHl^T^.  Visesa-bhavfit,  from  the  existence  of  the  species,  or  of  the 
peculiarity.  fe^T^T^T^Visesa-abhavat,  from  the  non-existence  of  the 
species,  or  of  the  peculiarity. 

11.  '  (It  is)  smaller,'  '  (It  is)  larger,' — such  affirmations,  in 
respect  of  one  and  the  same  object,  arise  from  the  existence  of 
the  species,  or  of  the  peculiarity,  and  from  the  non-existence  of 
the  species,  or  of  the  peculiarity. — 267. 

The  word,  '  iti/  indicates  the  sense  of  attribution  or  usage.  There 
is,  then,  all  this  usage  that  a  jujube,  is  .small  in  relation  to  a  fraeZ-fruit, 
that  an  emblic  myrobolan  is  large  in  relation  to  a  jujube,  that  a  hael- 
fruit  is  large  in  "relation  to  an  emblic  myrobalan.  Amongst  these, 

'(It  is)  large' such  usage  with  regard  to  them  is  primary.  If  it  be  asked 

how  it  is  so,  says,  <  visesa-bhavat/  i.e.,  because  of  '  bhava,  i.e.,  existence 
of  '  visesa/  i."e.  the  very  species,  magnitude,  by  '  bhava/  i.  e..  the 
relation  of  more,,  etc.  On  the  other  hand,  the  trantment  of  them  ag 
*mall,  is  secondary  or  relative.  If  it  be  asked  how  this  is  so,  he  says, 
<  visesa-abhavat/  i.  e.,  because  of  the  non-existence  in  them  of  the 
species,  smallness.  For,  smallness,  as  an  effect,  resides  only  in  binary 

atomic  aggregates,  and,  as  eternal,  resides  in   the  ultimate    atoms,    and 

•consequently  it  does  not  exist  in  a  jujube,  etc. 


206  VAlSESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


Or,  the  meaning  may  be,  that  the  treatment  of  a  jujube,  etc.,  as 
small  is  secondary,  because  of  the  '  bhava,'  i.  e.,  the  existence  in  the 
constituent  parts  of  the  jujube,  etc.,  of  the  '  visesa,  i.  e,  the  cause  of 
magnitude,  namely,  multiplicity  of  constituent  parts,  magnitude,  and. 
accretion,  and  because  of  the  '  abhtxva,'  i.  e.,  the  non-existence,  in  the 
constituent  parts  of  the  jujube,  etc.,  of  the  '  vifiesa,'  i.  e.f  the  cause  of 
smallness,  namely,  duality  which  does  not  co-exist  in  the  same  substra 
tum  with  magnitude.  —  11. 

In  what  sense  the  same  thinj  appears  both  small  and  large,  continued. 
ives  the  reason  why  the  attribution  of  small  nas.s  is  secondary  : 


I  V9  I  *  I  ^  II 

Eka-kala-tvat,    from    simultaneity    (of  the    cognitions  of 
largeness  and  smallness). 

12,  (The  attribution  of  smallness  is  secondary),  because  of 
the  simultaneity  (of  the  cognition  of  largeness  and  smallness  in 
respect  of  the  same  object.)  —  268. 

Magnitude  and  minuteness  are  perceived  at  one  and  the  same  time. 
And  these,  magnitude  and  minuteness,  being  mutually  contradictory, 
cannot  appear  together  in  one  and  the  same  substratum.  The  intuition 
of  magnitude,  therefore,  is  there  primary  inasmuch  as  the  cause  of 
magnitude  exists  there,  and  the  intuition  and  application  of  minute 
ness  are  secondary.  This  is  the  meaning.  —  12. 

Above  continued. 
Upaskdra,  —  He  status  tho  reason  for  the  priiuarinoss  of  the  intuition  of  magnitude  : 


II  VS  \\  I  \\  \\ 

•  Dristantat,  from  example,  or  analogue.  ^  Cha,    And. 
13.     Also  because  there  is  the  analogue.  —  269. 

The  meaning  is  that  it  is  seen  likewise  that  in  the  natural  order  of 
things  the  practical  recognition,  i.  e.,  the  application,  of  large,  larger,. 
and  largest,  must  be  with  regard  only  to  things  possessing  magnitude, 
namely,  the  jujube,  the  ernblic  myrobalan,  and  the  bael  fruit,  just  as 
the  application  of  white,  whiter,  and  whitest,  is,  according  to  the 
nature  of  things,  with  regard  only  to  white  objects,  namely,  a  piece  of 
cloth,  a  conch-shell,  a  crystal,  etc.  —  13. 

Minuteness  and  magnitude  do  not  exi^t  in  minuteness  and  magnitude. 

Upask&ra.  —  It  may  be  objected  :  In  virtue  of  the  usage,  "  Small  Measure  or  Extension," 
"  Large  Measure  or  Extension,"  it  is  known  that  there  is  magnitude  also  in  magnitude  as 
ft  measure  or  extonsion,  and  that  there  is  sm  allness  in  smallness  also.  How,  then,  can  these 
bo  said  to  exist  in  Substance  alone  ?  H  ow,  again,  does  not  the  contradiction  result,  in 
Attribute,  of  being  existent  in  Attribute  ? 


KANlDA  SfrTRAS  VII,jl,  16.  207 


Anutva-mahattvayoh,  in  minuteness  and  magnitude. 
^lmtva~inakattva-abhavah,  non-existence  of  minuteness 
and  ef  magnitude.  qTR^^i:  Karmma-guuaih,  by  Actions  and  Attri 
butes.  sqi^FT:  Vyakhyatah,  explained. 

14.  The  non-existence  of  minuteness  and  magnitude,  in 
minuteness  and  magnitude,  is  explained  by  (the  explanation, 
already  given,  of  the  non-existence  of  Actions  and  Attributes,  in) 
Actions  and  Attributes.  —  270. 

To  this  he  replies  : 

The  meaning  is  that  as  Attribute  and  Actions  do  not  possess 
minuteness  and  magnitude,  so  also  do  not  minuteness  and  magnitude 
possess  minuteness  and  magnitude.  The  usage  should  be  regarded  as 
derivative.  —  14. 

Above  continued. 

It  may  be  urged  that  as  Attributes  are  possessed  of  Attributes,  —  ^and  how  else  could  there 
be  such  uses  as  '•  Large  (i.  e.,  extensive)  Sound,"  "  Two  Sounds,"  "  One  Sound,"  "  Twenty- 
four  Attributes,"  etc.  ?  —  and  as  Actions  appear  to  be  possessed  of  Actions,  —  and  how  else 
could  there  be  such  uses  as  "  It  goes  quickly,"  "  It  goes  s.viftly  "  ?  so  minuteness  and  magni 
tude  must  also  be  possessed  of  minuteuess  and  magnitude. 


:  II  vs  I  $  1 

:  Karmmabhih,   by  actions.    ^wrffijr     Karmmani,     actions. 
Ounaih,    by    attributes.  ^     Cha,    arid.  JTITi:   Grunah,    attributes 
Vyakhyatah,  explained. 

15.     Actions  have  been    explained  (to    be    void)    of    Actions 
and  Attributes,  of  Attributes.  —  271. 

With  this  in  view,  he  says  : 

By  Actions,  Actions  are  not  possessed  of    Actions.     By   Attributes 
Attributes  are  also  not  possessed  of  Attributes.  In   like  manner,  minute 
ness  and  magnitude  are  also  not  possessed  of  minuteness  and  magnitude. 
The    usage,    however,    is,    in    all    these    cases,    derivative.     This  is  the 
meaning.  —  15. 

Minuteness  and  Magnitude  do  not  exist   in  Attribute  or  in  Action. 

Upaakdra  —  It  may  be  urged  that  usage  suoh  as  "  Lirge  Actions,"  "  Minute  Actions,'' 
"  Large  Attributes,"  "  Minute  Attributes,"  etc.,  entails  that  Actions  possess  minuteness 
and  magnitude,  and  also  Attributes  possess  both  of  them.  In  anticipation  of  this,  he  says  : 


u  ^  n  i 

Anutva-mahattvabhyam,    by    minuteness    and   magni 


tude.  ^j5TcirmTKarmma-gunah,  actions  and  attributes.  ^  Oha;and. 
Vyakhyatah,  explained. 

16.  By  minuteness  and  magnitude,  Actions  and  Attributes 
also  are  explained  (to  be  void  of  minuteness  and  magnitude). 
—272. 


208  VAISESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

The  meaning  is  that  as  minuteness  and  magnitude  are  not  posses 
sed  of  minuteness  and  magnitude,  so  Actions  are  not  possessed  of  either 
of  them,  nor  are  Attributes  possessed  of  either  of  them.  This  treatment 
as  such  however,  is  derivative  as  aforesaid.  This  is  the  import.  —  16. 

Bhdsya.  —  Minuteness  and  magnitude  may  be  predicated  of  action 
and  attribute. 

Length  and  shortness  do  not  exist  in  length  and  shortness. 
Upaskdra.  —  He  extends  ths  process  of  minuteness  and,  magnitude  to  length  and  shortness, 


II  \3  I  \  \  \\3  \\ 

Eteua,     hereby.     5>J?cr^?rr%      Dirghatva-hrasvatve,  length  and 
shortness.  STTW^  Vyakhyate,   explained. 

17.     Hereby  are  explained  Length  and  Shortness.  —  273. 

Length,  and  shortness  also  are  not  possessed  of  length  and  short 
ness,  Whatever  is  productive  of  magnitude,  the  same  is  productive  of 
length  ;  whatever  is  productive  of  minuteness,  the  same  is  productive 
of  shortness.  If  it  be  asked,  the  cause  being  the  same,  how  there  can 
be  this  difference  in  the  effect,  the  reply  is  that  it  is  proved  or  explain 
ed,  like  attributes  produced  by  burning,  by  the  difference  of  antecedent 
non-existence.  Wherever  there  is  minuteness,  there  is  shortness  ;  where 
there  is  eternal  minuteness,  there  is  eternal  shortness,  etc.  This  is  the 
meaning  of  the  extension  or  analogy.  —  17 

How  Measure  or  Extension  is  destroyed. 
Upaskdra.  —  He  now  points  out  that  which  destroys  (Measure  or  Extension):  _ 


u 


Anitye,  in  the  non-eternal    ^TpTcZW;  Anityam,  non-eternal,  peri 
shable. 

18.     In  the  non-eternal,  (Measure  or  Extension    also  is)    non- 
eternal.  —  274. 

All  this  four-fold  Measure  or  Extension,  being  present  in  perisha 
ble  substance,  disappears  only  on  the  destruction  of  the  substratum, 
and  not  on  account  of  contradictory,  other  attributes. 

Objection.  —  But  the  Measure  or  Extension  of  a  water-pot  is  destro 
yed,  although  the  water-pot  still  exists;  how  else,  even  after  the 
breaking  of  the  ueok  of  the  water-pot,  can  there  be  the  recognition, 
"This  is  that  very  water-pot"? 

Answer.  —  This  is  not  the  case,  in  as  much  as  the  destruction  of 
the  water-pot  is  necessary  or  inevitable,  by  the  destruction  of  the 
substratum.  For,  it  stands  neither  to  reason  nor  to  experience  that, 
the  binary  atomic  aggregates  being  destroyed  on  the  destruction  of 
the  conjunction  of  two  ultimate  atoms,  there  is  non-destruction  of 
the  tertiary  atomic  aggregates  constituted  by  the  binary  ones,  and 
of  limestone,  etc.,  constituted  by  the  tertiary  atomic  aggregates. 


KANADA  SUTRAS  VII,  1,21.  209 


Objection. — How  then  does  the  recognition   arisa? 

Answer. — It  is  an  error,  like  the  recognition,  "This  is  that  very 
flame  of  the  lamp." 

Objection. — But  the  recognition  of  the  the  lamp  is  certainly  correct 
knowledge;  whereas  minuteness  and  magnitude  undergo  production 
and  destruction. 

Answer. — This  cannot  be  maintained,  because  it  has  been  already 
mentioned  that  their  destruction  is  not  possible  without  the  destruction 
of  their  substratum. — 18. 

What  Measure  or  Extension  is  eternal. 

I  Upaskdra. — Is  then  minuteness,  inhering  in  ultimate  atoms,  destroyed,  as  are  Colour  r 
etc.,  of  terrene  ultimate  atoms?  Is  magnitude  also,  inhering  in  ether,  etc.,  destroyed,  aa 
are  Sound,  Understanding,  etc.?  In  anticipation  of  these  objections,  he  says: 

n 

Nitye,  in  the  eternal.  f^R^q;  Nityam,  eternal. 

19.     In  the  eternal,  (Measure    or    Extension    also    is    eternal. 

—275. 

Measure  or  Extension  which  exists  in  eternal  substances,  e.  g., 
ether,  etc.,  and  also  in  the  ultimate  atoms,  is  eternal  since  there  is 
nothing  to  destroy  it. — 19. 

Eternal  Measure  or  Extension  is  called  Parimandalam. 

Upaskdra. — He  states  the  name  by  which  the  Measure  or  Extension  of  the  ultimate 
atom  is  denoted  in  the  Vaisesika  system: — 


n  vs  i  ?  i  **  n 

Nityam,  eternal.  TfcW^TO;  Parimandalam,  Parimandala,  the 
allround,  or  the  spherical.  Measure  or  Extension  of  the  ultimate 
atom. 

20.     Parimandala  is  eternal. — 276. 

Pdrimandalyam   has    the    same    denotation  as   'Parimandalam/    So 
it  has  been  said,  "Elsewhere  than  in  Pdrimandalya,  etc." — 20. 

Proof  of  true  Minuteness  and  true  Shortness. 

Upaskdra. — It  may  .be  asked:  If  minuteness,  or  shortness  as  applied  respectively  to  a 
jnjube,  an  emblic  myrobalan,  etc.,  and  to  fuel-sticks,  sugar-canes,  etc.,  is  not  transcendental 
or  real,  (but  apparent  only),  what  then  is  the  proof  of  them  as  transcendental? 

Accordingly  he  says: 


Avidya,  false  knowledge.     Nescience.    *3    Cha,  moreover,  and. 
Vidya-lingam,   mark  or  indication  of  knowledge. 


210  VAI£E§IKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

21.     False  knowledge  is,    moreover,  the    (inferential)    mark  of 
(true)  knowledge.—  277, 

'The  mark  of  knowledge'  is  'false  knowledge.'  The  meaning 
therefore,  is  this:  The  cognition  or  consciousness  of  minuteness 
in  respect  of  a  jujube,  an  eiublic  myrobalan,  etc.,  and  the  consciousness 
of  shortness  in  respect  of  sticks  for  fuel,  sugar-canes,  etc.,  are  all 
avidySi  or  false  knowledge,  inasmuch  as  real  or  transcendental  minute 
ness  and  shortness  do  not  exist  there.  Moreover,  it  is  admitted  by 
those  who  hold  the  doctrine  of  anyatha-khyati,  illusion  of  the  senses, 
that  every  where  unscientific  knowledge  is  just  preceded  i.  e.,  pre 
supposed,  by  scientific  knowledge.  So  that  true  consciousness  of 
minuteness,  as  well  as  true  consciousness  of  shortness,  should 
be  inferred.  This  is  the  meaning.  In  like  manner,  secondary  use  of 
words  being  impossible  without  the  primary  use,  minuteness  and 
shortness,  in  the  primary  sense  of  the  terms,  must  be  thought  of  to  be 
present  somewhere.  —  21. 

Vivriti.  —  -But  why  should  substance,  in  the  form  of  the  ultimate 
atom,  be  admitted,  when  it  is  not  perceptible  to  the  senses'?  On  the 
other  hand,  substance  which  is  perceptible  to  the  senses,  such  as  a 
tertiary  atomic  aggregate,  etc.,  should  be  recognised. 

To  meet  this  objection  he  says  : 

'  Avidya/  i.  e.,  unscientific  knowledge,  in  other  words,  cognitions, 
such  as  "  Earth  is  eternal,"  Water  is  etrnal,"  etc.,  of  which  the 
obje-rs  are  wholes  made  up  of  parts,  is  the  inferential  '  mark/  of 
'  Vidya,'  i.  e.,  scientific  knowledge,  namely,  that  Earth  is  eternal,  of 
which  the  object  is  (i.  e.,  in  respect  of),  the  ultimate  atom  ;  because 
everywhere  scientific  knowledge,  is  preceded  by  unscientific  know 
ledge,  for  nowhere  it  is  possible  for  a  man  to  have  the  erroneous  idea 
that  Earth  is  eternal,  if  he  does  not  know  what  eternality  is.  This  is 
an  indirect  proof.  The  method  ef  proof  of  ultimate  atoms  as  realities, 
which  has  been  pointed  out  before,  should  be  preferred. 

Ether  and  Soul  possess  infinite  Measure  tr  Extension. 

Upaakdra.—'H.e  describes  the  nature  or  proper  from  of  the  Measure  or  Extension  of  Ether, 
«to.   which  has  been  already  inferred  by  the  mark  of  their  substance-ness. 


II  \9  I  t  I  RR  II 

Vibhavat,  in  consequence  of  omnipresence,  infinite  ex 
pansion,  or  universality.  *T£T^  Mahan,  vast.  Immense.  Infinitely  large. 
H^istf:  Akasah,  Ether.  ?r«n  Tatha,  so.  The  same.  5*  Cha,  and.  Also. 
*n?TT  Atma,  Soul. 

22.     Ether,  in  consequence  of  its  vast    expansion,  is  infinitely 
large.     So  also  is  the  Soul.—  278. 

'Vibhavah'  denotes  capacity  for  conjunction,  or  the  characteristic 
of  being  in  conjunction,  with  all  dense  bodies  ;  and  this,  being  im 
possible,  or  incapable  of  proof,  without  vast  magnitude,  leads  to  the 
inference  of  vast  magnitude.  It  is  also  observed  by  us  that  Sounds 


KANlDA  SftTRAS  VII,  1,  23.  211 

are  produced,  just  at  one  and  the  same  time,  both  at  Bar&nast  (Benares) 
»nd  at  Pdtaliputra  (Patna)  ;  It  is  one  and  the  same  Ether  that  is  here 
the  combinative  cause.  Consequently  the  pervasion  of  Ether  is  proved. 
Pervasion,  again,  consists  only  in  connection  with  infinitely  vast 
Measure  or  Extension.  To  suppose  a  diversity  of  Ether  would  be 
superfluous  ;  hence  only  one  Ether  should  be  recognised.  Such  re 
ference  as  "  A  portion  or  division  of  Ether/'  is,  however,  relative, 
being  due  to  conjunction  with  the  water-pot,  etc..  (occupying  a  limited 
space,  or)  possessing  limits.  And  the  relativity  consists  in  the  charac 
teristic  of  being  in  conjunction  with  substances  possessing  limits. 

'  Tatha  atma  '  :  As  Ether  is  immensely  vast,  since  it  possesses 
universal  pervasion,  that  is,  the  characteristic  of  being  in  conjunction 
with  all  dense  bodies,  so  is  also  the  Soul  immensely  vast.  Did  not  the 
characteristic  of  being  in  conjunction  with  all  dense  bodies  belong  to 
Soul,  then  action  would  not  be  produced  in  the  respective  dense  bodies, 
as  a  result  of  conjunction  of  the  Soul  carrying  its  adristam  or  destiny, 
inasmuch  as  adristam,  being  present  in  a  different  substratum,  is 
dependent  upon  or  stands  in  need  of,  '  proximity,'  (or  a  common  plat 
form),  in  order  that  it  may  be  productive  of  action  ;  and  that  ' 
proximity'  is  nothing  but  conjunction  of  the  Soul  carrying  its  adris*(iml 
Likewise,  as  the  body  moves  on,  the  production  of  knowledge,  pleasure, 
etc.,  in  particular  situations,  is  impossible  or  incapable  of  proof  except 
on  the  theory  of  the  universal  pervasion  of  the  Sould.  Consequently, 
the  Soul  also  is  pervasive.  The  Soul,  however,  is  not  only  one,  like 
Ether,  since,  as  has  been  already  pointed  out,  difference  of  status  or 
condition  is  observed.  This  is  the  import. 

In  these  cases,  the  magnitude  is  infinite,  and  is  also  eternal,  like 
the  minuteness  of  the  ultimate  atom. 

In  like  manner,  should  be  inferred  infinite  length  in  the  case  of 
Ether,  etc.,  and  infinite  shortness  in  the  case  of  the  ultimate  atom.  —  22. 

Mind  is  infinitely  small. 

Upaskdra.  —  -It  may  be  asked  that  Mind  being  all-pervading,  inasrauoh  as  it  is  always  a 
touchless  substance,  like  Ether,  and  inasrauoh  as  it  is,  like  the  soul,  the  field  wherein  takes 
place  the  conjunction  which  is  the  non-oombi  native  cause  of  knowledge,  etc.,  why  has  it  nots 
been  raertioned  along  with  Ether  and  the  Soul  ?  Henoe  he  says  : 


II  V9  I  \  \ 

Tat-abhavat,  in  consequenes  of  the  non-existence  of  that, 
i.  e.,  universal  expansion.  ?mj,  Arm,  atomic.  Minute.  Small,  ift: 
Man  ah,  mind.  The  internal  organ. 

23.     In  consequence  of  non-existence  of   universal    expansion, 
Mind  is  atomic  or  infinitely  small.  —  2,79. 

'  Manah'  is  ami,'  in  consequence  of  the  non-existence  of  '  that/ 
i.  «.,  universal  expansion  or  the  characteristic  of  being  in  conjunction 
with  all  dense  bodies.  .Did  the  characteristic  of  being  in  conjunction 
with  all  dense  bodies  exist  (in  it),  then,  there  being  simultaneous 
conjunction  with  |0tt>re|3ian  <6ne  sense,  simultaneity  of  cognitions  would 


212  VAI&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY 

follow,  with,  the  result  that  there  would  be  no  particular  attachment  or 
act  of  attention.  The  two  inferences,  ^namely,  that  Mind  is  all-pervad 
ing,  because  it  is  a  touchless  substance,  and  that  mind  is  all-pervading, 
because  it  is  the  seat  of  conjunction  which  is  the  non-combinative 
cause  of  cognition,  etc.)  are,  however,  unproved  in  point  of  their  sub 
ject  matter,  so  long  as  Mind  is  not  proved  (to  exist),  while  in  the  state 
of  Mind  being  proved  (to  exist),  they  are  counter-oppposed  by  proof 
which  leads  to  the  cognizance  of  the  object  i.  e.,  Mind  as  an  atom.) 

Objection.  —  Minuteness  cannot  be  thus  proved  from  non-existence 
of  universal  expansion,  since  the  inference  would  be  unduly  applicable 
to  the  water-pot,  etc. 

Answer.  —  It  would  not,  inasmuch  as  (only)  non-pervasion  (and  not 
atomic-ness)  is  proved  by  non-existence  of  universal  pervasion. 

In  one  body,  therefore,  there  is  just  one  mind,  since  the  supposition 
of  plurality  would  entail  randundancy.  To  imagine  parts  even  of  a 
single  mind  would  be  showing  exuberance  of  imagination.  Moreover, 
being  touchless,  they  cannot  originate.  By  such  arguments,  (infinite) 
minuteness  is  proved.  This  is  the  import.  —  23 

Space  is  all-pervading. 
Upasltdra.  —  He  states  the  argument  for  the  infinite  magnitude  of  space  :  — 


\  \  \  W  \\ 


?T%  G-unaih,  by  attributes.  f\3T  Dik,  space.  5g[<5qffi[  Vyakhyata,  ex 
plained. 

24.     By  attributes,  Space  is   explained    (to  be    all-pervading). 
—280. 

The  meaning  is  that,  *  gunaih,'  i.  e.,  by  attributes  characterised  as 
priority  and  posteriority  inherent  in  all  dense  bodies,  and  appearing 
in  the  forms  of  the  intuitions  of  the  Bast,  the  West,  etc.,  common  to 
all  persons  inhabiting  all  the  island  or  divisions  of  the  globe,  space 
also  is  explained  under  the  aspect  of  pervasion.  For,  it  will  be  men 
tioned  later  on  that  in  the  production  of  (the  notions  of)  priority  and 
posteriority,  the  cause  is  relative  understanding  having  for  its  subject- 
matter  larger  and  smaller  number  of  conjunctions  with  the  conjunct. 
Moreover,  the  supposition  of  a  plurality  of  space  is  contravened  by 
(the  fault  of)  superfluity  of  supposition. 

Objection.  —  How,  then,  can  there  be  the  intuition  and  the  expression 
or  reference,  namely,  "  Ten  spaces  (i.  e.,  quarters)"? 

Answer.  —  'The  objection  does  not  arise,  since  it  has  been  already 
stated  that  they  are  due  to  particular  upddhi  or  external  condi 
tions.  —  24. 

Time  is  all-pervading" 

Vpaskdra.  —  He  explains  the  universal  expansion  of  Time  : 

*  n  u  1  1  1  w  n 


KANlDA  SftTRAS  VII,  1,  24.  213 

Karane,  in  cause.  To  a  specific  cause,  or  to  a  universal  cause. 
Kalah,  time. 

25.     Time    (is    the    name  given)  to  (a  specific,  or  a  universal) 
cause.     (Hence,  in  either  case'  it  is  all-p3rvading).281 

Time  is  the  name  which  fully  designates  the  substance  which  is  the 
cause  of  the  intuitions  of  reciprocal  prior  and  posterior,  simultaneity 
non-simultaneity,  slow,  and  fast.-  Such  an  intuition,  common  to  all 
persons  in  all  countries,  would  be  impossible  without  the  universal 
pervasion  of  time.  Universal  parvasion,  that  is  to  say,  connection  with 
infinite  magnitude,  therefore,  belongs  to  it. 

Or,  in  virtue  of  such  intuitions  as  "barn  now/'  Time  is  known  to 
be  the  efficient  or  occasional  cause  of  all  that  is  produced;  a-id  this  is 
dependent  upon  universal  pervasion,  for  an  occasional  cause  must  be, 
as  a  rule,  in  proximity  with  the  cambinative  and  non-combinative 
causes. 

Or,  the  use  or  application  of  past,  future,  and  present  is  universal: 
consequently  time  is  all-prevading. 

Or,  time  is  the  name  of  the  substance  which  is  the  cause  of  the 
application  or  use  of  moments,  lavas  (thirty-six  winks),  hours,  watches, 
days,  days-and-nights,  fortnights,  months,  seasons,  half-years,  years, 
etc-  Consequently,  such  use  or  application  being  universal,  time  is 
universal,  and  therefore,  infinitely  large. 

The  supposition  of  its  manifoldness  is,  as  has  been  already  stated, 
contravened  by  (the  fault  of)  superfluity  of  supposition. — 25. 

Here  ends  the  first  chapter  of  the  seventh  book  in  the  Commentary 
,of  Sankara  upon  the  VaiSesika  Aphorisms. 


«214  VAIS*ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

BOOK  SEVENTH—  CHAPTER  SECOND. 

Number  :  Proof  of  Unity. 

[7paslcdra.~ln  the  second  chapter  there  are  five  section  :  (a)  the  section  on  the  examina 
tion  of  attributes  existing  in  one,  and  in  more  than  one,  object  ;  (b)  the  section  on  the 
examination  of  attributes  existing  only  in  more  than  one  object  ;  (c)  the  section,  in  passing, 
on  the  examination  of  the  relation  of  sound  and  significance  (i.  c.,  of  words  and  their  meaning); 
(d)  the  section  of  the  examination  of  attributes  existing  in  one  object  and  baring  for  their 
non-combinative  cause  conjunction  with  universal  substances  void  of  particular  or  distingui 
shing  attributes  ;  and,  (c)  the  section  on  the  examination  of  combination.  Now,  the  percep 
tibility  of  Number,  etc.,  also  is  dependent  upon  combination  in  the  same  object  with  magni 
tude.  Accordingly,  with  a  view  to  examine  number,  and  also  separateness,  immediately  after 
the  determination  of  measure  of  extension,  in  violation  of  the  order  of  enumeration,  the 
author  says  : 


Rupa-rasa-gandha-sparsa-vytirekat,  because  of 
difference  from  Colour  .Taste,  Smell,  and  Touch.  smfaTTO  ArtMntaram, 
a  different  object,  t^^q  Ekatvain,  unity. 

1.     Because  of  its  difference  from  Colour,    Taste,  Smell,    and 
Touch,  Unity  is  a  different  object.—  282. 

'  Rftpa-rasa-gandha-sparsa  '  is  indicatory    of    all    attributes    other 
than  the    pentad    beginning    with    number,   (i.  e.}  number,    measure   or 
extension,  separateness,  conjunction,    and    disjunction).     '  Vyatirekat* 
=  because  of  difference  or  divergence.     The  meaning,  therefore,  is  this  i 
li  One  water-pot  ''  —  Such  particular  intuition  can  be  produced  by  some 
particularity.     And  that  particularity  is  not  colour,  etc.,  for  the  intui 
tion    is    produced    by    difference    from,  or  without,  them.     Nor  is  it  the 
being  a  water-pot,  etc.,  that  is  the  condition  or   occasion  (of    the    intui 
tion),  for  such  intuition  is  produced    in    respect  of  a  piece  of  cloth  also. 
Nor  is  unity  a  Genus,  like  Existence,  for  its  denotation    is    neither    less- 
nor  more  than  that  of  Existence-     Nor,  again,  is  it  a    Genus  confined  to 
substance    only,    for    it    is    neither  less  nor  more  extensive  than  Subs 
tance-ness.     Nor  does  the  difference    or    mutual    distinction    (of    Unity 
and    Substance-ness)    arsie    from    difference    of  intuition,  even  though 
they  are  neither  less  nor  more  extensive  than  each  other  ;  for  if    differ 
ence  of  intuition  were  caused  by  itself,  existence  also    would   be    differ 
entiated  •  if,    on    the    other    hand,  it  were  to  be  caused  by  difference  of 
subject-matter,  then,  difference  of  subject-matter,  as    has    been    stated, 
is    not    possible,   since,    otherwise,    there    would    be    difference    of   the 
characteristic    of    being    a  small  water-pot  and  of  being  a  large  water- 
pot.     Nor  is  the  view,  held  by    Bhusana,    that    unity    is    non-difference 
from  (or  identity  withj  itself,  a    reaaoi.able  one.     Were    self-identity  of 
the    water-pot    its    Unity,  then    there  would  be  no  intuition  of  Unity  in 
the  case  of  a  cloth,  etc.,     Bhuiaha's  other  view,  namely,   that  difference- 
from    itself    constitutes    Duality,    etc.,    is    also    not     valid  ;  for  variety 
of  uses  of  difference  from  itself  or  self-distinction,  as  being   common  to 
three,  four,  and  so  on,  is  not  possible  or  capable  of  proof.     This    is  the- 
import.r  —  1. 

Proof  of  Separateness. 

Upaskdra^—With  a  view  to  prove  separateness  also,   by  means  of  its  similarity  to  Unity,, 
he  says  : 


KANiDA  SftTRAS  VII,  2,  2.  215 


II  V*  I  *  I  *  II 

HIT  Tatha,    similarly.  ^W7^n  Prithakatvam,    separatenesg.     Indivi 
duality. 

2.     Similarly,  Separateness  (is  a  different  object).  —  283. 

The  practice  of  discrimination  or  separation  verily  exists,  in  the 
form,  namely  "  This  is  separate  from,  other  than,  a  different  object 
from,  this.''  For,  separation  means  definite  apprehension  or  grasp, 
having  regard  to  certain  limits.  Here,  again,  Colour,  stc.,  are  not  the 
cause,  since  they  are  not  its  invariable  antecedents,  and  also  because 
the  limits  (of  them)  are  undefinable. 

Objection.  —  Separateness  is  nothing  but  anyonya-abhdva,  mutual 
non-existence,  non-existence  which  opposes  identitity  ;  for,  like  "  This 
is  separate  from,  other  than,  a  different  object  from,  this,"  the  intuition 
u  (This  is)  different  from  this  "  rests  on  anyonya-abhdva. 

Answer.—  li  is  not  so.  Although  the  terms  separate,  etc.,  are 
synonymous,  they  do  not  convey  the  sense  of  anyonya-ahdva,  'since  in 
that  case  the  use  of  the  ablative  ('from  ,)  would  not  be  possible  or 
reasonable,  because  the  intuitions,  "  This  is  separate  from  this,  "  and 
•"  This  is  not  this,  "  contain  different  subject-matter.  Nor  is  separat 
eness  an  object  or  entity  which  possesses  anyonya-abhdva,  for  ,  then,  in 
"  A  cloth  is  a  not  water-pot,  ,,  there  would  also  be  the  use  of  the 
ablative.  Objection.  —  The  intuitions,  "  It  is  separate,  „  and  „  It  is 
distinct,  "  having  the  same  form,  Separateness  is  nothing  but  distinct 
ness.  Answer.  —  It  is  not.  For,  in  that  case,  while  Maitra  possessed  the 
distinction  of  a  staff,  the  intuition,  "  This  Maitra  is  separate  fcrm 
Maitra.  "  would  also  arise.  Likewise  it  would  entail  the  application  of 
Separateness  to  Ether  it  is  distinguished  by  Sound,  and  to  the  Soul 
when  it  is  distinguished  by  Understanding. 

For  the  same  reason,  dissimilarity  or  difference  in  property  also  is 
not  Separateness,  inasmuch  as  it  would  entail,  in  the  case  of  a  water- 
pot,  which  has  been  burnt  to  redness,  such  usage  as  "  This  water-pot 
is  separate  from  the  dark  water-pot."  For,  it  is  the  possession  of 
properties  repugnant  to  a  thing,  that  constitutes  difference  in  property 
from  that  thing.  And  this  appears  in  the  state  of  redness  immediately 
after  darkness. 

Nor  is  it  Genus  itself,  which  is  Separateness.  For,  the  limits  of  a 
-Genus  are  undefinable.  Moreover,  it  would  entail  inter-mixture  of 
classes  ;  for,  if  it  exist  only  in  existent  things,  then  its  denotation 
would  be  neither  less  nor  more  than  that  of  existence,  andlif  it  exist  in 
substance  only,  then,  than  that  of  Substance-ness.  —  2. 

Unity  and  Separateness  do  not  exist  in  Unity  and  Separateness. 

Upaskdra.  —  It  may  be  argued  that  inasmuch  a3  there  is  thia  nsage,  namely  "  On* 
Unity,"  "Separateness  is  separate  from  colour,  etc.,"  therefore  (there  is  Unity  also  in  Unity, 
fieparateness,  and  similarly,  iu  other  and  other  instances.  Accordingly  he  saya  : 


216  VAIi§E§i£A  PHILOSOPHY. 


u  vs  i  *  i  \  (\ 

Ekatva-ekaprithaktvayoh,    in    Unity    and     Separa- 


teness  of  one,  or  Individuality. 

abhavah,     non-existence     of    Unity     and    Individuality. 
Anutva-mahattvabhyum,     by      minuteness     and     magnitude: 
Vyakhyatah,  explained. 

3.  The  non-existence  of  Unity  and  Individuality,  in  Unity 
and  Individuality,  is  explained  by  minuteness  and  magnitude. 

—284. 

The  meaning  is  that  as  minuteness  and  magnitude  do  not  possess 
minuteness  and  magnitude,  the  application  of  which  to  them  is  deriva 
tive,  so  Unity  and  Individuality  do  not  possess  Unity  and  Individu 
ality  do  not  possess  Unity  and  Individuality,  the  application  of  which 
to  them  is  derivative. 

"  By  Actions,  Actions,"  "  By  Attributes,  Attributes,"  —  these  two 
aphorisms  (vii.  24,  25,  infra")  also,  which  employ  analogy,  here  seem  to 
carrv  the  same  import  as  the  preceding  (  i,  e.,  the  present  )  aphorism 
employing  an  analogy.  The  meaning  is  that  as  Actions  are  not  possess 
ed  of  Actions,  nor  are  Attributes  possessed  of  Attributes,  so  Unity  and 
Individuality  are  not  possessed  ef  Unity  and  Individuality.  —  3. 

Unity  is  not  universal,  but  is    confined  to  /Substance  only. 

Upaskdra.  —  It  may  be  asked  :  The  application  or  use  of  Unity  is  indeed  common  to 
Attributes  and  Actions-  What  does  here  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  Unity  exists  only  in 
Substances  and  not  in  Attributes,  etc  ?  To  this,  he  replies  : 


n  vs  i  R  i  a  n 

Nih-amkhatvat,  being  void  of  Number.  ^v&fTOiJFn  Karm- 
ma-gunanam,  of  Actions  and  Attributes,  ^rssfa^  Sarvva-ekatvam,  Uni 
versal  Unity.  T  Na,  not.  f^q^1  Vidyate,  exsists. 


4.     Actions  and  Attributes  being  void   of    Number,    universal 
Unity  does  not  exist.  —  285. 

Unity  of  all  —  that  does  not  exist.  On  what  ground  ?  So  he 
says.  —  '  Nihsamkhyatvam  '  means  the  state  or  condition  of  standing 
away  from  Number.  Thus  Actions  and  Attributes  are  void  of  Number. 
Number  being  an  attribute,  Number  by  no  means  exists  in  attributes  ; 
nor,  again,  in  Actions,  because  Attributes  are  excluded  from,  or  denied 
to,  Action,  since,  otherwise,  Actions  would  possess  Substance-ness- 
And  the  attributeness  of  Number  has  been  proved,  and  also  the  Nunu 
ber-ness  of  Unity.  This  is  the  import.  —  4. 

Cognition  of  Unity  in  Attribute  and   Action  is  erroneous. 

Upaskdra.  —  How,  then,  do     such   cognitions  arise,  as  "  One   colour,""  One  taste,  "etc.  P1 
To  this,  he  replies  : 


KANiDA   SftTRAS  VII,  2,5.  217 


I  V9  I  *  I  *  II 

yT'rf  Bhrdntam,  mistaken  ;  Erroneous.  <T<^  Tat,  that,  i.  e.,  the  cogni 
tion  of  Unity  in  Action  and  Attribute. 

5.     That  (i.e.,  the  cognition  of    Unity    in    Action    and    Attri 
bute)  is  erroneous.  —  286. 

The  meaning  is  that  the  cognition  of  Unity  which  arises  in  the 
case  of  Attributes  and  Actions,  is  erroneous.  'Cognition'  —  this  is  the 
complement  of  the  aphorism,  because  an  objection  of  the  opponent  has 
bee  i  thrown  into  it.  The  application  (of  Unity  in  these  cases)  is, 
however  derivative,  and  it  is  non-difference  from  itself,  or  self-identity  T 
which  constitutes  the  derivation.  Nor  is  Unity  nothing  but  that  (i.  e., 
self  identity),  for  the  reply  has  been  already  given.  —  4. 

Bhdsya  :  —  explains  VII.  ii.  5  as  demolishing  the  view  contained 
in  VII.  ii,  4. 

Indirect  proof  of  Unity. 

Upaskdra.  —  It  may  bo  asked  :  tk  Let  this  application  of  Unity  bo  secondary  in  tho  case 
of  substances  also  and  the  intuition  of  it  erroneous,  what  is  the  use  of  unity  at  all  ?  "  To- 
this,  he  replies  : 


Ekatva-abhavat,  in  consequence  of  the  non-existence  of 
Unity.  *T?rfi:  Bhaktih,  derivative  (function.  Secondariness.  3  Tu,  but. 
However.  ^  Na,  not.  frq^  Vidyate,  exists. 

6.  In  consequence  of  the  non-existence  of  Unity,  however, 
secondariness  would  not  exist.  —  287. 

If  Unity  in  its  transcendental  or  real  sense  be  nowhere  to  be  obser 
ved,  then  the  application  of  the  term  could  not  be  secondary,  for  the 
secondary,  has  for  its  antecedent  the  primary,  use.  Nor,  again,  could 
the  intuition  be  erroneous,  for  error  has  for  its  antecedent  certain 
knowledge.  For  it  is  the  certainly  known  that  is  (erroneously)  attri 
buted,  and  not  the  erroneous,  for  the  intuition  of  the  non-existent  has 
been  disproved,  and  the  intuition  of  the  otherwise  (i.  e.,  the  existent) 
has  been  proved.  —  6. 

J3hdsya  :  —  explains^?!!,  ii.  6in  support  of  the  interpretation  of  VII.  ii. 
5,  thus:  Did  not  unity  exist  everywhere,  there  would  be  no  bhalfti,  pro 
duction,  of  things  at  all.  For,  any  one  thing  is  the  joint  product  of 
several  things  ;  but  there  can  be  no  such  production  in  the  absence  of 
one-ness  or  unity  ;  unity,  therefore,  exists  in  all  places. 

Unity  and  Separateness  of  one  do  not  exist  in  effect  and  cause. 

Upaskdra.  —  Effect  and  cause,  e.  g.,  threads  and  cloth,  possess  Unity  and  single  Indivi 
duality.  Single  Individuality  also  belongs  to  them  for  the  very  same  reason  for  which  Unity 
belong  to  them.  For  it  is  not  possible  that  a  thing  can  be  separate  from  itself.  For  when  a 
piece  of  cloth  is  torn  asunder  and  the  threads  are  drawn  out  one  after  another,  a  piece  of  cloth 
different  from  them  is  not  observed.  Were  a  piece  of  cloth  different  from  the  threads,  then  it 
shou  Id  be  observed  under  the  characteristic  of  being  different  from  them,  like  a  water-pot.  In 
like  manner,  a  water-pot  also  is  nothing  but  identical  with  the  two  potsherds  (which  compose 
it),  since  a  water-pot  also  being  broken,  nothing  over  and  above  the  two  potsherds  is  observed. 
Accordingly  it  has  been  said,  "  A  whole  made  up  of  parts  is  nothing  else  than  the  parts.": 
This  is  the  view  of  the  Sftmkhya  thinkers.  And  for  the  purpose  of  controverting  it,  he  says  : 


218  VAI&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


v*  I  *  I  V9  II 


'•  Karyya-karanayoh,  of  or  in  effect  and  cause. 
Ekatva-ekaprithakatva-abhavat,  in  consequence  of  non-exist 
ence  of  identity  and  heterogeneity.  f^rclNr1^^?^  Ekatva-ekapritha- 
ktvam,  Unity  and  Individuality.  ?f  Na,  not.  fcent  Vidyate,  exists. 

7.  Effect  and  cause  are  neither  the  same  nor  similar  (in 
being  equally  distinguished  from  all  other  things)  ;  therefore,  Unity 
and  (single)  Individuality  do  not  exist  in  them.—  288. 

Effect  and  cause  —  these  two  are  not  one.  Why  ?  So  he  says  :  from 
non-existence  of  'ekatva,'  i.  e.,  from  non-existence  of  non-difference  and 
because  co-existence  of  plurality  and  unity  in  the  same  substratum  is 
not  therefore,  possible,  as  would  be  required  by  the  proposition  that 
the  very  same  thing  which  is  the  effect,  is  also  the  cause,  e.  y.,  that 
threads  are  a  piece  of  cloth. 

Objection.  —  But  there  is  as  a  matter  of  fact  such  co-existence  in  the 
same  substratum,  seeing  that  the  term,  waters,  is  applied  to  a  drop  of 
water  only,  and  also  seeing  that  the  term,  wives,  is  applied  to  a  single 
Woman. 

Answer.  —  Such  is  not  the  case.  For  such  applications  can  be 
possible  by  reference  to  multiplicity  of  constituent  parts.  In  the  case 
of  the  ultimate  atom  of  water,  however,  such  application  takes  place, 
according  to  some  thinkers,  by  means  of  multiplicity  of  colour,  etc., 
naturally  belonging  to  it  ;  while,  according  to  others,  it  is  due  to  the 
characteristic  force  of  sound  or  language  which  should  not  be  found 
fault  with.  Nor  do  fibres  present  in  a  salvinia  cucullata  and  honey 
comb  obtain  the  application  of  cloth.  Nor  do  threads  singly  prevail  to 
contain  and  to  drag  anything. 

Nor,  again,  can  the  two,  effect  and  cause,  become  the  substratum 
of  single  Individuality,  for  it  is  saor.  that  they  become  the  limits  of 
each  other.  How  ?  So  he  says,  '  eka-prithakatva-abhavat,'  i.  e.,  in 
consequence  of  the  non-existence  of  '  eka-prithakatvam,'  or  non-hetero 
geneity  or  non-difference  in  property  ;  in  other  v\ords,  because,  of  effect 
and  cause,  difference  in  property  is  observed,  for  it  is  universal  among 
mankind  that  the  notions  of  thread  and  cloth,  as  well  as  of  warter-pot 
and  potsherds,  are  embraced  by  different  acts  of  understanding. 

Objection.  —  Why,  then,  are  not  Colour,  Taste,  Smell,  and  Touch, 
cognised  by  their  difference  (or  separately  from  one  another,  i.  e.,  one 
after  another  always)  ? 

Answer.  —  Because  of  the  absolute  similarity  of  their  forms,  i.  e., 
modes  of  manifestation.  And  when  sometimes,  as  in  a  piece  of  cloth  of 
variegated  colour,  etc.,  separate  cognition  also  takes  place,  it  is  because 
the  differences  of  Number,  Measure  or  Extension,  etc.,  are  most  mani 
fest  there.  —  7. 


KANADA  StTTRAB  VII,  2,  8.  219 

Only  non-eterml  unity  and  separateness  of  one  proceed  from  like 
attributes  in  their  causes. 

Uj>'i->kdra.—T3.o   points    out      that    non-eternal    Unity   and   Separateness-of-one    have  for 
their  antecedents  attributes  of  these  causes. 


H  V?  I  R  |  t;  H 

Etat,  this,  i.  e.,  the  characteristic  of  having  the  attributes  of 
the  cause  as  antecedents.  ^n^T3i4t:  Anityayoh,  of  the  two  non-eternals, 
namely,  Number  and  Separateness.  5'7T<Rf<WC  Vyakhyatam,  explained. 

8.  This,  (as)  explained  in  the  case  of  the  two  non-eternals 
(namely,  Number  and  Separateness,  should  be  understood  only 
in  the  case  of  non-eternal  Unity  and  Separateness  of  one).  —  289. 

The  characteristic  of  having  attributes  of  the  cause  as  antecedents,. 

which    has    been    explained  in    the    case    of    non-eternal    Number    and 

Separateness,  should  be    understood  to  apply  to   only  non-eternal  Unity 

and  Separateness-of-one,  since  other  Numbers   and  Separatenesses      are 

produced  by    relative  understanding.     As  the    characteristic  of  having 

attributes  of    the    cause  as    antecedents  belongs  to    non-eternal    colour 

and  touch  of  Fire,  so  it  belongs  also  to  non-eternal  Unity  and  Separate 

ness-of-one.     This  is  the    import.     It  follows,    therefore,    that  Numbers 

beginning  with  two  and    ending  with  the   highest    arithmetical  number, 

possess    or    reside  in    more  than    one    substance.     It  also    follows    that 

separatenesses    beginning    with  Separateness  of    two  and    ending    with. 

Separateuess  of   the  highest  arithmetical    number,  co-exist  in  the  same 

substratum  with  those  Numbers.     Now,  the    processes  of  the  production 

and  destruction  of  Duality,    etc.,  are    as  follows  ;     When    two    homoge 

neous  or  heterogeneous  substances  are  in    contact  with    the  eye,    cogni 

tion    of   the    attribute    qualified    with   the   notion    or    characteristic  of 

Unity,  which  is  the    genus  of  the   two  numbers,  Unities,  inhering  in  the 

two  substances,  are  produced  immediately  after  the  elimination  of  differ 

ence  in  thought  i.e.,  the  assimilation  of  the  two  substances  under  the  notion 

(of  Unity);  and  it  is  this  cognition  which  is  called  relative  understanding 

or  the  conception  of  the  one  in  the  many.     By  it  Duality  is  produced  in 

the  two  substances.     Then  there  takes  place  reasoning  about  the  notion 

or  characteristic  of  Duality  which  is  the  genus  of  the  Duality  so  produ 

ced.    After  it,  simultaneously  there  appear  destruction  of  relative  under 

standing    by    means    of    that    reasoning,    and    a    qualified    or    concrete- 

understanding  having  for  its  content  the  attribute    Duality  as  qualified 

with    the    notion     or     characteristic      of     Duality.     And    in    the    next 

moment  there  are    simultaneously  produced  destruction  of  the  attribute- 

Duality  in  consequence  of  the    destruction    of    relative    understanding, 

and  cognition,  in  the  form  of    "Two  substances,"  qualified  with  Duality. 

Thereafter,    results   Samskdra,  impresssion    or  a    fixed    idea,    from    the 

above    cognition    of   substances   qualified    with  Duality.     Thus,    to  sum 

up  :  —  Beginning  with  contact  with  the  sense  and  ending  with  Samskdra 

or  impression,  there  are  eight  moments  ;  viz.,  contact    of  the  sense    with 

the  substratum  of  Duality  which  is  going  to    be  produced,   then    cognU 

tion  of  the  genus  inherent  in    the  attribute  Unity,  then    relative  under 

standing    in  the    form  of    cognizance    of   the   many    along    with   the 


220  VAI&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

attribute  Unity  as  qualified  with  the  generic  notion  or  characteristic 
of  Unity,  then  production  of  the  attribute  Duality,  then  cognition  of 
the  genus  inherent  in  Duality,  then  cognition  of  the  attribute  Duality 
as  qualified  with  that  genus,  then  cognition  of  substances  as  qualified 
with  the  attribute  Duality,  and  then  Samskdra  or  impression.  The 
order  of  destruction,  again,  is  as  follows  :  Destruction  of  the  generic 
notion  or  characteristic  of  Unity,  from  relative  understanding  ; 
destruction  of  relative  understanding,  from  cognition  of  the  generic 
notion  or  characteristic  of  Duality  :  destruction  of  the  generic  notion 
or  characteristic  of  Duality,  from  cognition  of  the  attribute  Duality  ; 
destruction  of  cognition  of  the  attribute  Duality,  from  cognition  of  subs 
tances  as  qualified  with  the  possession  of  Duality;  and  destruction  of  the 
latter,  from  Samskdra  or  impression,  or  from  cognition  of  other  objects. 

Objection. — Why  is  not  cognition  of  substance  qualified  with  the 
possession  of  Unity,  itself  produced  after  the  cognition  of  Unity,  when 
all  the  causes  of  its  production  are  present  there  ?  For,  cognition  of 
attribute  taking  place,  there  can  be  no  delay  in  the  cognition  of 
substance.  From  that  same  cognition  (of  substance  so  qualified), 
therefore,  there  being  destruction  of  relative  understanding,  from  its 
destruction  will  follow,  at  its  very  next  moment,  destruction  of  Duality. 
Hence  destruction  of  Duality  resulting  at  the  very  moment  prior  to  the 
qualified  or  concrete  cognition  in  the  form  of  "  Two  substances,"  the 
production  of  cognition  of  substance  as  qualified  with  the  possession  of 
Duality,  becomes  impossible. 

Answer. — The  argument  is  defective  ;  for,  it  is  relative  understand 
ing  uninfluenced  or  unobstructed  or  unobscured  by  the  causes  of  the 
production  of  Duality,  etc.,  which  invariably  produces  cognition 
qualified  with  the  content  of  substance,  the  above  supposition  being 
made  on  the  strength  of  the  result. 

Objection. — But  still  destruction  of  relative  understanding  being 
caused  by  the  very  Samskdra  or  impression  produced  by  itself,  the 
fault,  pointed  out  above,  again  appears  all  the  same,  since  there  is 
possibility  of  destruction  of  Duality  at  the  very  moment  prior  to  the 
cognition  qualified  with  Duality. 

Answer. — It  does  not,  since  cognition  of  pure  attribute,  or  of 
attribute  unassociated  with  substance,  is  not  productive  of  Samskdra  or 
impression.  For  pure  attribute  can  be  nowhere  called  back  to  mind, 
since  everywhere  it  is  only  by  the  background  of,  or  as  contained 
in,  substance,  that  there  can  be  recollection  of  attribute. 

Objection. — Let  it  be  so;  still  inasmuch  as  even  at  the  time  of  the 
production  of  qualified  or  concrete  cognition,  there  may  be  destruction 
of  Duality,  the  possibility  of  non-production  of  qualified  cognition 
remains  in  the  very  same  state.  For  qualified  or  specific  cognition, 
illuminative  of  that  which  is  present,  cannot  possibly  appear  at  the 
moment  of  the  destruction  of  the  qualification  or  that  which  serves  to 
specify,  since  there  is  no  such  observation. 

Answer. — This  is  not  the  case.  For,  cognition  of  that  which  serves 
to  specify,  contact  of  sense  with  that  which,  is  specified,  and  non-appre 
hension  of  non-association  of  the  above  two,  which  make  up  the  whol* 


KANADA   SUTRAS  VII,  2,  8.  221 

cause  of  specefic  cognition,  are  possible  also  in  the  case  of  the  subject 
under  discussion.  If,  however,  contact  of  sense  with  that  which  serves 
to  specify,  is  also  required,  then  this  too  existing  at  the  preceding 
moment,  the  very  contact,  which  exists  at  the  preceding  moment,  is 
observed  to  be  the  cause.  That  which  serves  to  specify,  or  a  qualifica 
tion  or  distinction,  which  is  beyond  the  compass  of  specified  cognition, 
may  also  exist:  for,  it  is  only  the  being  the  object  or  content  of  cogni 
tion  productive  of  specified  cognition,  which  determines  the  charac 
teristic  of  being  a  distinction  or  that  which  serves  to  specify,  but  the 
being  the  object  of  specified  cognition  does  not  also  determine  it. 

Objection. — In  this  view,  an  upalalcsdnam  or  indication  also  will 
come  to  have  the  nature  of  a  visesaiiani  or  distinction. 

Answer.— By  no  means;  for,  existence  in  the  same  substratum, 
which  is  invariable  and  which  does  not  cause  specified  cognition, 
determines  the  characteristic  of  being  a  distinction,  whereas  an  indi 
cation  exists  in  a  different  substratum  from  that  which  it  indicates. 
Thus,  when  there  is  possession  of  a  raven  in  the  house  of  Devadatta, 
then  the  raven  is  a  distinction.  But  when,  flying  over  the  house,  it 
does  not  exist  in  it,  then  the  raven  is  an  indication. 

Objection. — This  being  so  it  would  follow  that  in  such  cases  as 
"There  is  taste  in  that  which  possesses  colour,"  etc.,  colour,  etc.,  also 
would  be  distinctions. 

Answer. — This  is  not  an  objection,  since  it  is  desired  to  be  so. 
Objection. — Then  there  too  taste  will  exist. 

Answer. — No,  since  that  which  exists  in  something  distinguished  by 
the  possession  of  something  else,  does  not  necessarily  exist  in  that  by 
which  it  is  so  distinguished.  For  a  distinction  and  that  which  is  dis 
tinguished  are  not  one  and  the  same  thing. 

Objection — At  the  time  of  the  destruction  of  Duality,  there  exists 
no  connection  with  the  distinction.  How  can  specified  cognition,  or 
•cognition  of  that  which  is  distinguished,  be  produced? 

Answer. — The  question  does  not  arise,  for  the  meaning  of  the  term, 
the  being  distinguished  or  qualified,  is  only  non-variation  or  non- 
deviation  or  non-divergence  from  that  (i..  e.,  the  distinction);  whereas 
the  manifestation  of  that  (i.  e.}  the  distinction)  exists  there  (i.  e.,  in 
specified  cognition)  also. 

Hence,  the  teachers  say,  nothing  remains  unproved. 

In  like  manner,  on  the  analogy  of  the  production  and  destruction 
of  Duality,  should  be  understood  the  production  and  destruction  of 
Triplicity. 

Duality  is  destructible  by  the  destruction  of  relative  understand 
ing,  for  an  existing  attribute  cannot  be  destroyed  in  the  absence  of 
another  attribute  opposed  to  the  destruction  of  its  substratum,  like 
ultimate  cognition,  since  ulitimate  cognition  is  destroyed  by  destruc 
tion  of  adristam.  In  some  cases  it  is  destroyed  also  from  destruction. 


222  VAlgESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

of  substratum,  e.g.,  where  there  is  knowledge  of  the  genus,  unity,  simul 
taneously  with  action  in    the    constituent    parts    of    the    substratum    of 
Duality.     It  is  in  this  way:    Action    in  constituent  parts   and    cognition 
of  the  genus;    Disjunction  and   relative     understanding;    destruction  of 
Conjunction      and      production      of     attribute    Duality;    destruction    of 
constituted  substance  and  cognition  of    the    genus    Duality; — here    des 
truction   of  Duality  results  from  destruction  of  substance,  and    destruc 
tion  of  relative    understanding  from    cognition    of    the    genus    Duality; 
since,  destruction  of  relative  understanding  taking    place    at    the    same 
time  with  destruction    of  Duality,  there  exists  no  relation,  resembling  the 
relation    of  effect  and  cause,  between  them.     Where,   however,    there    is 
simultaneity    of    action    in    the    constituent  parts  of  the  substratum    of 
Duality  and  relative  understanding,  there  destruction  of  Duality  results 
from  both  destruction  of  substratum  and  destruction  of  relative    under 
standing.     It  is    in  this  way:  Action  in  the    constituent  parts  and    rela 
tive    understanding;    production      of     disjunction     and     production    of 
Duality;  destruction  of  conjunction  and  cognition  of  the  genus   Duality; 
destruction  of  constituted    substance  and  destruction  of  relative  under 
standing;     destruction  of  Duality  from  both,  the    capacity    of   each    for 
destroying    being    observed.     This    process    properly    fits    in     with    the- 
theory     of  two     cognitions    being    related     as    the    destroyed    and    the- 
destroyer  ;    and    it    is    this  theory    which    is   legitimate    or    established 
by  proof. 

Objection. — The  entire  group  of  cause  being  the  same  in  the  cases 
of  Duality,  Triplicity,  etc.,  how  is  it  that  there  is  this  difference  in 
their  effects,  namely,  Duality  is  constituted  by  two  Unities,  Triplicity 
by  three  Unities  ? 

Answer. — The  question  cannot  arise,  since  Duality,  etc.,  do  not  exist 
in  Unity. 

Objection. — It  is  Duality,  Triplicity,  etc.,  inhering  in  the  combina 
tive  cause,  which  determine  cognitions  of  Duality,  Triplicity,  etc. 

Answer. — This  is  not  the  case  ;  for  prior  to  the  production  of 
Duality,  etc.,  Duality,  being  absent  therefrom,  the  enquiry  after  the 
cause  of  Duality,  etc.,  does  not  cease  even  there,  and  the  existence  of 
such  difference  in  relative  understanding,  and  in  Unities,  or  in  the 
supposition  of  that  on  the  strength  of  the  result,  is  contravened  by 
non-observation. 

Objection. — Let  the  use  also  of  Duality,  etc.,  proceed  from  the 
same  source  ;  what  is  the  need  of  Duality,  etc.?  Difference  will  result 
from  difference  of  adristam. 

Answer. — Were  it  so,  Triplicity,  and  Four-ness,  would  be  sometimes- 
produced  also  by  the  set  of  causes  originative  of  Duality.  Hence  it 
would  entail  non-uniformity.  Moreover,  it  may  be  said  in  this  con 
nexion  that  difference  in  the  effect  is  explained  by  difference  in  prior 
non-existence  ;  aa  in  the  case  of  colour,  taste,  smell,  and  touch,  pro 
duced  by  burning,  difference  is  produced  under  the  same  set  of  causes. 

Objection. — Prior  non-existence    also  ia  common    to    all,    or    ia   th&   j 
same  in  all  cases. 


KANADA  SUTRAS  VII,  2,  8.  223 

Answer. — It  is  not  ;  for  each  prior  non-existence  in  each  parti 
cular  case  has  been  ascertained  to  have  causality  towards  its  own 
effect  only. 

Or,  the  process  should  be  carried  on  in  this  way  that  Duality  is 
produced  by  pure  relative  understanding,  and  Triplicity  by  relative 
understanding  accompanied  by  Duality.  In  such  cases  as  "  I  have 
killed  a  hundred  of  ants/'  Duality  is  not  at  all  produced  in  conse 
quence  of  the  non-existence  of  combinative  cause.  Accordingly,  it 
should  be  observed,  the  use  of  number  is  there  derivative  or  secondary. 

Professor  Sridhara  opines  that  in  the  case  of  an  army,  a  forest, 
etc.,  iu  consequence  of  the  non-existence  of  constant  relative  under 
standing,  only  multiplicity  is  produced,  but  not  hundred,  thousand, 
and  ether  numbers.  With  regard  to  this  view,  Professor  Udayana 
observes  that  if  such  be  the  case,  then  in  these  cases  no  doubt 
could  arise  whether  it  be  hundred,  '  or  thousand,  etc.,  nor  could 
there  be  such  cognition  as  "  A  large  army,"  "  A.  larger  army,"  and 
that  hence  this  is  not  the  case.  Here  the  matter  should  be  discussed 
in  the  following  manner  :  Multiplicity  is  either  nothing  but  number 
commencing  from  Triplicity,  and  terminating  with  the  highest  arith 
metical  number,  or  another  number  different  from  them.  It  cannot 
be  the  first  since  in  the  case  also  of  any  army,  a  forest,  etc.,  there  is 
as  a  rule  production  of  hundred,  thousand,  and  other  numbers.  Nor 
can  it  be  second,  since  multiplicity  different  in  mark  from  Triplicity, 
«tc.,  is  not  observed.  Multiplicity,  therefore,  is  only  number,  namely, 
hundred,  etc.,  produced  by  relative  understanding  which  is  uniformly 
•constant  in  each  case  and  which  does  not  depend  upon  Unity.  The 
manifestation  of  hundred,  etc.,  does  not,  however,  take  place  there, 
since  nothing  exists  there  which  can  manifest  it. 

We,  on  the  other  hand,  say  that  multiplicity  is  really  a  different 
number,  existing  in  the  same  substratum  with  Triplicity,  etc.,  and 
producible  by  relative  understanding  productive  of  Triplicity,  etc. 
It  is  so  in  consequence  of  the  difference  of  prior  non-existence.  How 
else  can  such  a  statement  be  possible  as  "  All  I  can  say  is  that  there 
.are  many"?  I  do  not  know  particularly  whether  they  be  a  hundred  or 
a  thousand  "?  As  magnitude  or  largeness  and  length  co-exist  in  the 
same  substance,  so  do  Triplicity,  etc.,  and  multiplicity  co-exist  in  one 
and  the  same  substratum.  For,  to  the  query,  "  Shall  I  bring  a  hundred 
•or  a  thousand  of  mango  fruits  ?"  the  reply  is  given,  viz.,  "  Let  a  large 
number  of  them  be  brought.  What  is  the  use  of  inquiring  about  a 
particular  number  ?"  This  being  so,  Triplicity  is  produced  by  rela 
tive  understanding  accompained  by  Duality,  Four-ness  by  relative 
understanding  accompained  by  Triplicity,  and  so  On,  one  after  the 
•other.  In  the  production  of  multiplicity,  on  the  contrary,  there  is  no 
rsuch  uniformity  or  law  that  the  relative  understanding  must  be  quali 
fied  with  the  possession  or  accompaniment  of  all  the  numbers  which 
.stand  behind  it.  Hence  in  the  case  of  an  army,  a  forest,  and  the  like, 
only  multiplicity  is  produced,  but  not  any  other  number  ;  and  sj  the 
alternatives  amongst  which  Doubt  has  to  swing  also  become  really 
non-existent. 


224  VAlSESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


Separateneas,  again,  exists  in  the  same  substratum  with  that  (i.  e., 
number).  Hence  as  is  Duality,  so  is  also  separateness  of  two  ;  and 
so  on. 

Objection.  —  The  use  of  separateness  of  two,  etc.,  being  possible  by 
means  of  separatenesses  of  one  existing  in  the  same  substratum  with 
Duality,  Triplicity,  etc.,  what  is  the  use  of  Separateness  of  two,  etc.? 

Answer.  —  The  question  cannot  be  raised  in  view  of  the  discrepancy 
that  while  in  the  case  of  "•  A  cloth  and  a  clod  are  separate  from  a  water- 
pot"  there  is  no  perception  of  the  separateness  of  the  dual  (cloth  and  clod) 
being  produced  by  the  dual  and  the  single  limiting  each  other,  there  is 
such  perception  in  the  case  of  their  individual  separateness.  Nor  does 
this  theory  entail  and  explain  Priority  of  two,  for  Priority  of  two  is 
explained  and  possible  by  means  of  two  priorities  existing  in  the  same 
substratum,  or  co-extensive,  with.  Duality-  The  contradiction  in  respect 
of  one  being  the  limit  of  the  other,  which  exists  in  the  case  of  separate 
ness,  does  not  exist  in  the  case  of  Priority  ;  since  the  intuition.  "  These 
two  are  prior,"  is  possible  or  proved  in  same  way  as  the  intuition. 
"  These  two  are  blue."  For,  though  two  bodies  occupying  the  same 
part  of  space  possess  equal  manifoldness  of  conjunctions  with  the  con 
junct,  yet  production  of  different  effects  is  possible  by  moans  of  the 
difference  of  the  conjunction  of  space  and  body,  which  is  the  non-com 
binative  cause.  Moreover,  as  two  Unities  jointly  become  the  non-com 
binative  cause  of  Duality,  it  being,  in  like  manner,,  possible  for  two 
separatenesses  of  one  or  single  individualities,  jointly  operating,  to 
possess  non-combinative  causality  towards  the  production  of  separate- 
ness  of  two,  or  dual  individuality,  it  is  not  observed  that  more  than,  one 
i.e.,  many,  conjunctions  are,  by  their  joint  operatioii,  originative  of  one 
effect,  which  is  not  a  constituted  substance,  by  means  of  the  proximity 
known  as  combination  in  the  same  object  with  the  effect.  On  the  other 
hand,  by  means  of  the  proximity  known  as  combination  in  the  same 
object  with  the  cause,  a  larger  number  of  conjunctions  of  threads  and 
the  cylinder  of  wood  in  a  loom  do  really  originate  a  single  conjunction 
of  a  cloth  and  the  cylinder  of  wood  in  a  loom  This  is  the  direction. 

On  the  analogy  of  destruction  of  Duality,  etc.,  should  be  under 
stood  also  destruction  of  separateness  of  two,  etc.  —  8. 

Vivriti.  —  It  may  be  objected  :  "  The  thread  is  distinct  from  the 
cloth  and  is  dissimilar  to  the  cloth  "  —  such  intuitions  are  simply  erro 
neous,  since  it  is  threads  conjoint  among  themselves,  which  becomes 
the  cloth,  and  since  no  proof  exists  that  the  cloth  is  distinct  from  the 
threads.  It  cannot  be  said  that  difference  from  the  thread  can  be 
proved  to  exist  in  the  cloth  by  means  of  its  dissimilarity  to  the  thread, 
for  dissimilarity  itself  is  not  proved.  For,  the  nature  of  the  cloth  does 
not  constitute  its  dissimilarity  to  the  thread,  inasmuch  as  in  the  state 
of  the  manifestation  of  the  cloth,  the  nature  of  the  cloth  i.i  recognised 
in  the  threads  themselves.  Accordingly  it  has  been  taught  by  Professor 
fjvarakrisna  :  — 


The  effect  is  existent  (in  the  cause,  in  an  enveloped    state,  prior    to- 
its  production)  ;  For,  there  can  be  no  production  and    manifestation  of 


KANADA  StfTRAS  VII,  2,  9.  225 


that  which  is  non-existent  ;  there  can  be  no  connection  of  the  cause 
with  the  effect  (if  the  latter  be  non-existent)  ;  (some  connection  must 
exist  between  the  cause  and  the  effect,  since)  the  production  of  every 
thing  is  not  possible  from  everything  else  ;  there  can  be  production  of 
one  thing  from  another,  if  the  two  are  mutually  related  as  the  producer 
and  the  producible  (and  such  relation  cannot  be  possible  if  the  effect 
be  non-existent)  ;  and  the  cause  and  the  effect  are  identical,  (so  that 
the  one  cannot  be  non-existent,  while  the  other  is  existent).  —  S&mkhya- 
kdrikd,  verse  9). 

This  being  the  case,  the  non-existence  of  non-difference  and  non- 
dissimilarity  between  the  cause  and  the  effect  remaining  itself  unprovedr 
how  can  it  establish  the  relation  of  Unity  and  of  Separateness  of  one 
or  single  individuality  ? 

To  meet  this  objection,  the   author  says  : 

'  Etat/    i.  e.,    the    possession     of    the    non-existence     of  Unity   and 
Separateness     of    one    in    consequence  of  the     possession    of    the  non- 
existence  of  non-difference    and    non-dissimilarity,    has  been   observed, 
'  anityayofy/     that     is,    in     the    case    of    non-eternal     cause    and     non- 
eternal  effect.     This  is  the  meaning.     Accordingly  on  the  hypothesis  of 
the  non-difference  of  the  threads  and  cloth,  it  would  follow    that    in  the 
state  of  the  production  of  the  threads,  there  would    arise    the    intuition 
and  use  of  language    that    the   cloth    is  being  produced  ;  in  the  state  of 
the  production  of  the  cloth,  that  the  threads  are  being  produced  ;  iu  the 
state  of  the  destruction  of  the  threads,  that  the  cloth  is  being    destroy 
ed  ;  iii  the    state    of    the    destruction    of    the  cloth,  that  the  threads  are 
being  destroyed  ;  and  so  on.     Nor  can  it  be  maintained  that  production 
and    destruction    are    not   themselves  entitled  to  acceptance,  inasmuch- 
as  such  intuitions  are  explained  on  the  very  theory  of    development    or 
appearance  and  envelopment,    or   disappearance  ;  for  the  hypothesis  of 
an  appearance,  will  entail  a  regress  to    infinity.     If,  on  the  other  hand, 
the  production  of  the  appearance  is  admitted,  then  how  does  the  theory 
of  the    production    of   the    cloth,  etc.,  become  offensive  ?     If,  again,  the 
production  of  appearance  in  appearance  be  not    admitted,  then  appea 
rance  would  become  omniferous,  or  all-sided,  (which  is  not    desired    by 
the    objector).     For,    the    all-sidedness  of  appearance  is  not  recognised 
even  by  the  Samkhya    thinkers.     In    reality,    the    common     consent    of 
humanity    that    the    cloth   is    produced,    the    cloth  is  destroyed,  and  so 
forth,  is  proof  of  production  and  destruction  ;  for,  if  experience    of    one 
thing    be    admitted    to    have   another  thing  as  its  object,  we  must  deny 
also  the  water-pot,  cloth,  etc. 

Conjunction,  how  produced. 
U'paskilra.—'H.Q  begins  another  section  or  topio  :— 


5  Anytara-karmma-ja^,  produced  by  the  action  of  either 
of  two  things.  CTq^fTPF^T:  Ubhaya-karmma-ja^,  produced  by  action  of 
both.  ?-f4tT5T:  Samyoga-jah,  produced  by  conjunction.  ^  Oha,  and. 
Samyogali,  conjunction. 


226  VAI&ESIKA    PHILOSOPHY. 

9.  Conjunction  is  produced  by  action  of  any  one  of  two 
things,  is  produced  by  action  of  both,  and  is  produced  by  Conjunc 
tion,  also.— 290. 

Unobstructed  intuition  that  things  are    conjunct  is    proof    of    con- 
juntion.      So  also  are  effects  ;  e.  g.,  substance,  in  the  case  of    conjuntions 
of  constituent  parts  ;  colour  and  other    attributes  produced  by  burning, 
in  the  case  of  conjunction  of  fire  ;  particular    measure    or  extension,    in 
the    case    of    accretion  ;  sound,  in     the  case  of  conjunction  of  the  drum 
and  ether  ;  such  other  instances    should    be    understood.     Nor    is    Con 
junction    merely    production   without  the  intervention    of  empty  space. 
The  theories  of  transiency  and  transformation    of    things    having    been 
thrown     away,    Conjunction    is    the    coming    together    which     has  non- 
coming  together  for    its    antecedent.      And  it  is  produced  by  the  action 
of  one  of  two  things  ;  as  is  the     conjunction  of  a  motionless  post    with  a 
hawk    in       motion,    or    the    conjunction    of    one    in  motion,    when     the 
motion  is  not  directed  where  the  conjunction  takes   place,  e.  </.,  conjunc 
tion  of  a  runner  with  the  back    of    another    runner.     Conjunction    pro 
duced  by  the  action  of  both  the  conjunct  is  that  of  two    rams    or  of  two 
wrestlers,    since    it    is    produced    by    both  of    them  exercising  strength 
towards  each  other.     The  third  (conjunction  producced  by  conjunction) 
is  the  conjunction  of  the  hand  and  the  tree  resulting  from  the    conjunc 
tion  of  the  finger  and  the  tree-      And  it  results    sometimes  from  one  con 
junction  even,  as  the  conjunction    of    cloth    aud  reed    may    result    from 
the  conjunction  of  thread  and  reed.     In  some  cases,  one  conjunction    is 
produced    from    two    conjunctions,    as    from  two    conjunctions,  of  ether 
with  two  threads,  may   result  only  one    conjunction    of    a    two-threaded 
cloth  with  ether.    In  some  cases,  again,  a  single  conjunction  is  originat 
ed  even  by  a  plurality  of    conjunctions,    as    ten    conjunctions    of    ether 
with  ten  threads  may  originate  only  one   conjunction  of    a  ten-threaded 
cloth  and  ether.     Sometimes,  on    the  other  hand,    two  conjunctions    are 
produced  even    from    a    single    conjunction    as    their    non-combinative 
cause.     For  example,  there    having    first    taken    place    non-originative 
conjunction  between  two  ultimate    atoms,   terrene    and  aqueous,    subse 
quently  two  conjunctions,  originative  of  two  binary  atomic    aggregates, 
are    produced,    namely,    one    in    the  terrene  ulimate  atom  with  an  other 
terrene    ultimate    atom,     and    another    in  the    aqueous    ultimate    atom 
with   another     aqueous    ultimate     atom.     By    those    two      conjunctions 
inhering    in     homogeneous     things,    two     binary      atomic     aggregates 
are    simultaneously    produced.     Therein    by    that    one    non-originative 
conjunction    alone,    produced    between    the    terrene    and    the     aqueous 
ultimate  atom,  one  conjunction  of  the  terrene   ultimate    atom    with    the 
aqueous    binary    atomic    aggregate,    and    another    conjunction    of    the 
aqueous    ultimate   atom    with  the  terrene  binary  attomic  aggregate,  are 
produced  simultaneously  with  the  production  of  the  colour,  etc.,    of    the 
two  binary  atomic  aggregates. 

Inasmuch  as  the  conjunction  of  cause  and  not-cause  must  neces 
sarily  produce  conjunctions  of  effect  and  not-effect,  the  conjunction  of 
all-pervading  substances  (viz .,  Space,  Time,  Ether  and  Soul)  with  dense 
or  corporal  bodies  is  produced  by  action  of  one  of  the  two  only.  Of  two 
all-pervading  substances,  however,  there  is  no  conjunction,  since  there 
is  no  cause  (of  conjunction).  For  in  them  there  is  no  action,  nor  is 


KANADA  SOTRAS  VII,  2,  9.  227 

there  any  (combinative)  cause  ;  hence  there  cannot  be  in  this  case  also 
conjunction  of  effect  and  riot-effect  resulting  from  conjunction  of  cause 
and  not-cause.  Eternal  conjunction,  on  the  other  hand,  is  not  possible, 
for  conjunction  is  the  coming  together  of  two  things,  which  has  the 
not-coming  together  as  its  antecedent,  and  eternality  is  opposed  to  it. 
And  were  conjunction  eternal,  Disjunction  also  would  be  without  pro 
duction  ;  and  eternality  of  conjunction  will  not  be  obtained,  since  it 
would  be  impossibe  for  Conjunction  and  Disjunction,  which  are  contra 
dictories,  to  exist  side  by  side  in  their  indestructible  states.  More 
over,  yuta-siddhi  or  uncombined  or  naturally  unassociated  existence  is 
a  necessary  condition  of  Conjunction,  and  it  is  not  possible  in  the  case 
of  two  all-pervading  substances.  For  yuta-siddhi  is  merely  the  separate 
existence  of  two  or  of  one  of  two  ^unrelated)  things,  or  the  relation  of 
one  thing  being  inherent  in  another,  as  its  substratum,  when  the  twe 
have  been  externally  brought  into  relation  with  each  other. 

Destruction  of  Conjunction,  however,  results  from  Disjunction 
having  a  common  substratum  with  Conjunction.  la  some  cases  it  results 
from  destruction  of  substratum  also.  For  example,  action  is  produced 
in  the  constituent  fibre  of  a  thread  immediately  after  the  Conjunction 
of  two. threads  ;  thereby  is  caused  Disjunction  from  another  fibre  ;  from 
Disjunction  results  destruction  of  originative  conjunction  ;  from  this 
follows  destruction  of  the  thread  ;  and  from  destruction  of  the  thread 
results  destruction  of  Conjunction,  where  two  threads  haying  been  long 
conjoined,  action  is  not  produced  in  them.  Some,  on  the  contrary,  main 
tain  that  Conjunction  is  destroyed  by  simultaneously  produced  destruc 
tion  of  substratum,  and  by  Disjunction, inasmuch  as  action  is  conceived  to 
exist  in  another  thread  at  the  moment  when  by  action  iu  the  constituent 
parts  of  a  thread  there  is  effected  destruction  of  Conjunction  origina 
tive  of  the  thread.  This  is  impossible  ;  for  there  can  be  no  production 
of  Disjunction  at  the  moment  of  destruction  of  the  combinative  cause, 
since  the  rule  is  that  the  combinative  cause  is  of  equal  duration  with 
the  effect. 

This  same  Conjunction  which  is  an  independent  agent  in  the  origi 
nation  of  substances,  and  a  dependent  agent  in  the  origination  of 
attributes  and  actions,  is  the  counter-opposite  of  the  absolute  non- 
existence  existing  in  the  same  substratum  with  itself,  since  it  is  obser 
ved  to  be  so.  For  it  is  perceived  that  there  is  conjunction  of  an  ape 
in  the  Banyan  tree,  although  conjunction  of  the  ape  present  in  a  large 
Banyan  tree  is  limited  to  a  branch  only.  Were  such  mere  limitation  to 
a  part  not  sufficient  to  account  for  it,  then  conjunction  would  come  to 
exist  in  ultimate  atoms,  and  so  would  not  be  cognizable.  In  the  case 
of  the  all-pervading  substances  also,  it  is  the  difference  of  upddhi, 
adjunct  or  external  condition,  which  serves  to  localise  them.  Conjunc 
tion  present  by  limitation  to  that  is  not  pervaded  in  its  denotation  .  Of 
Conjunction  residing  in  the  ultimate  atoms  also,  direction  in  space, 
and  the  like  should  be  regarded  as  determinants. — 9. 

Disjunction,  how  produced. 

Upaskdra. — By    extending  the  mode  of  the  production  of  Conjunetion  to  Disjunction  ho 

says  : 


228  VAl6E§IKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


:  II  vs  I  R  I  ?o  || 

Etena,  by  this,  f^rm:  Vibhagafc,  disjunction.  «n$W  Vyakhyatah, 
explained. 

10.     By  this  Disjunction  is  explained.  —  291. 

Like  Conjunction,  Disjunction  also  is  produced  by  action  ef  either 
of  two  things,  by  action  of  both,  and  by  Disjunction.  Disjunction  takes 
place  between  a  hawk  and  a  post  by  the  action  of  the  hawk  ;  disjunc 
tion  of  two  wrestlers  or  of  two  rams  fighting  with  each  other,  by  the 
actions  of  both.  And  Disjunction  in  these  cases  has  its  production  at 
the  moment  immediately  following  the  production  of  action,  inasmuch 
as  there  exists  nothing  else  to  be  waited  for  or  depended  upon.  Accord 
ingly  it  has  been  said,"  Action  is  an  independent  cause  of  Conjunction 
and  Disjunction  "  (vide  Li.  l~,  t  above). 

Objection.  —  There  is  dependence  upon  substratum  where  Disjunction 
has  to  be  produced,  and  upon  destiuction  of  antecedent  Conjunction 
where  Conjunction  has  to  be  produced. 

Answer.  —  This  is  not  the  case,  for  action  is  independent  since  it 
does  not  depend  upon  anything  in  the  form  of  an  existence  which  has 
its  production  immediately  after  the  production  of  itself. 

Disjunction,  produced  by  Disjunction,  however,  is  two-fold, 
according  to  the  difference  of  Disjunction  of  cause  and  not-cause  pro 
duced  by  Disjunction  of  cause  alone,  and  the  difference  of  Disjunction 
of  effect  and  not-effect,  produced  by  Disjunction  of  cause  and  not- 
cause.  Therein  Disjunction  of  potsherd  and  Ether,  resulting  from 
Disjunction  of  the  two  potsherds,  is  an  example  of  Disjunction  of  cause 
and  not-cause,  resulting  from  Disjunction  of  cause  alone;  and  Disjunc 
tion  of  hand  and  tree  resulting  from  Disjunction  of  finger  and  tree,  and 
Disjunction  of  body  and  tree,  resulting  from  Disjunction  of  hand  and 
tree,  are  examples  of  Disjunction  of  effect  and  not-effect,  resulting  from 
Disjunction  of  cause  and  not-cause. 

Objection.-  —  There  is  no  proof  of  Disjunction  itself,  the  term,  Dis 
junction,  being  used  to  denote  only  non-existence  of  Conjunction. 

Answer.  —  It  is  not  so.  For,  if  non-existence  of  Conjunction  be 
absolute  non-existence,  then  it  would  follow  that  the  term  Disjunction 
would  be  used  to  denote  attribute  and  action  also. 

Objection.  —  Absolute  non-existence  of  Conjunction,  being  present 
in  two  substances,  is  the  source  of  the  intuition  of  the  disjunct. 

Answer.  —  It  cannot  be,  since  it  would  in  that  case  follow  that  abso 
lute  non-existence  of  Conjunction,  being  present  also  in  a  constituted 
whole  and  its  constituent  parts,  would  be  the  source  of  the  intuition 
of  the  disjunct. 

Objection.  —  The  term  "  two  substances  "  should  be  qualified  by  tho 
expression  "  not  being  related  to  each  other  as  effect  and  cause." 


KANiDA  SftTRAS  VII,  2,  10.  229 


Answer. — In  that  case,  absolute  non-existence  of  Conjunction, 
being  present  in  the  Vindhya  and  Himalaya  mountains  also,  would  be 
the  cause  of  the  intuition  of  the  disjunct. 

Objection. — Indeed  there  it  is. 

Answer. — It  is  not.  For  there  being  existence  of  erroneous  intui 
tion,  due  to  it,  in  the  case  of  attribute  and  action  also,  it  should  be 
considered  how  far  it  will  be  valid  to  make  it  the  source  of  convention 
or  usage  with  reference  to  the  accurate  intuition  only. 

Objection. — Destruction  of  Conjunction  is  Disjunction. 

Answer. — Were  this  the  case,  it  would  entail  the  use  of  the  terra 
Disjunction  on  Conjunction  being  destroyed  by  the  destruction  of  any 
one  of  the  two  things  in  Conjunction. 

Objection. — "Things  in  Conjunction"  should  be  qualified  as  being 
•existent. 

Answer. — In  that  case,  it  would  entail  the  intuition  of  Disjunction 
•even  in  the  state  of  Conjunction  of  a  jujube  and  an  emblic  myrobalan 
which  become  conjunct  again  immediately  after  the  destruction  of  one 
conjunction. 

Objection. — Disjunction  is  the  destruction  of  all  Conjunctions. 

Answer. — If  it  be  so,  then  there  would  be  non-existence  of  Disjunc 
tion  in  the  case  of  destruction  of  one  Conjunction,  since  the  denotation 
of  'all'  finds  no  place  there. 

Disjunction,  therefore,  exists,  and  it  is  an  additional  attribute. 

This  attribute,  again,  is  destructible  by  another  contradictory  attri 
bute,  inasmuch  as,  so  long  as  the  substratum  exists,  destruction  of 
attribute  cannot  be  possible  without  a  contradictory  attribute  existing 
in  the  same  substratum. 

Objection. — Action  itself  may  be  destructive  of  Conjunction. 

Answer. — It  cannot  be,  since  only  a  contradictory  attribute  is  des 
tructive  of  attribute.  Moreover,  although  where  finger,  hand,  arm,  and 
body  come  to  have  conjunction  with  the  tree,  by  means  of  their  respec 
tive  actions,  there  is  possibility  of  destruction  of  conjunction  of  the 
finger  and  the  tree,  by  means  of  theiaction  produced  in  the  finger  only, 
yet  there  would  not  follow  destruction  of  conjunctions  of  the  hand  and 
the  tree,  of  the  arm  and  the  tree,  and  of  the  body  and  the  tree,  since  the 
hand,  etc.  are  inactive  and  the  action  of  the  finger  rests  in  a  different 
substratum.  If  it  be  supposed  that  even  action  resting  in  a  different 
substratum  may  be  destructive  of  conjunction,  it  would  then  follow  that 
there  would  be  destruction  of  all  conjunctions  at  one  and  the  same 
moment  of  time,  by  action  wherever  it  may  be  produced. 

Objection. — -What  then  is  the  solution  here  on  your  theory? 

Answer. — Disjunction  of  the  hand  and  the  tree,  produced  by  Dis 
junction  of  the  finger  and  the  tree,  is  destructive  of  conjunction  of  the 
hand  and  the  tree.  This  is  a  matter  of  observation. 


230  VAI&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

Sarvajna  has  said  that  there  may  very  well  be  destruction  of 
conjunction  of  the  hand  and  tree,  by  the  very  action  of  the  finger,  rest 
ing  in  a  different  substratum,  and  that  there  will  be  no  undue  exten 
sion  (of  the  causality  of  action),  inasmuch  as  it  is  observed  that  mutual 
non-conjunction  of  the  container  and  the  contained  is  itself  destructi 
ble  by  action  resting  in  a  different  substratum.  This  too  is  not  a  sound 
opinion;  for,  distructiveness  is  everywhere  observed  to  belong  only  to  a 
contradictory  attribute  appearing  in  the  substratum,  and  it  is  not 
reasonable  to  abandon  that  without  some  argument  to  the  contrary. 

Sound  and  Disjunction,  again,  are  effects  of  Disjunction.  Therein 
we  shall  ponder  over  the  non-combinative  causality  of  Disjunction  to 
wards  the  production  of  Sound.  For,  of  the  Sound  which  is  produced, 
when  a  bamboo  is  being  split  up,  and  one  of  the  two  halves  is  held  down 
by  the  pressure  of  the  foot,  and  the  other  is  drawn  upwards,  we  find  no- 
other  non-combinative  cause  than  the  disjunction  of  the  half  and  ether 
(or  of  the  ether  within  the  halves).  Nor  do  we  find  any  non-combina 
tive  cause  over  and  above  Disjunction  in  the  case  of  the  sounding  forth 
of  a  bamboo  bursting  out  while  it  is  being  burnt  in  a  conflagration, 
We  also  infer  the  Disjunction  of  the  effect  and  not-effect  from  the  Dis 
junction  of  the  cause  and  not-cause.  How  else,  where  conjunction  of 
the  finger  and  the  tree,  conjunction  of  the  hand  and  the  tree,  conjunc 
tion  of  the  arm  and  the  tree,  and  conjunction  of  the  body  and  the  tree 
are  produced  by  the  respective  actions  of  the  finger,  etc.,  can  there  be 
destruction  of  the  conjunction  of  the  hand  and  the  tree,  and  of  other 
conjunctions,  even  on  the  destruction  of  the  con  junction  of  the  finger 
and  the  tree,  consequent  on  the  disjunction  of  the  finger  and  the  tree 
produced  by  action  produced  in  the  finger  alone?  For,  in  this  case, 
it  is  the  series  of  disjunctions,  produced  by  disjunctions,  that  is,  as  has 
been  already  stated,  destructive  of  the  corresponding  conjunctions* 
There  is,  however,  no  clear  evidence  in  the  case  of  disjunction  of  the 
cause  and  not-cause,  of  which  the  antecedent  is  the  disjunction  of  the 
two  (constituent)  causes  (i.e.,  the  two  halves  of  the  bamboo);  for,  it  is 
observed  that,  production  of  the  disjunction  of  ether,  etc.,  like  the  dis 
junction  of  one  of  the  two  halves  of  the  bamboo,  being  also  possible 
by  the  action  produced  in  the  other  half,  disjunction  is  produced  by 
the  action  of  that  other  half  from  all  those  with  which  that  half  was 
conjunct.  For  it  is  not  that  disjunctions  are  not  produced  also  from 
particular  parts  of  ether,  etc.,  by  action  produced  in  a  finger,  equally 
as  disjunction  from  another  finger.  Nor  is  it  that  disjunctions  from 
particular  parts  of  ether,  etc  ,  are  not  originated  by  action  produced 
in  a  lotus-leaf,  even  as  disjunction  from  another  lotus-leaf  is  produced. 
We  maintain,  "Let  a  single  action  originate  even  a  hundred  disjunctions, 
which  are  not  opposed  to  the  conjunction  originative  of  substance.  But 
that  action  which  originates  disjunction  which  is  opposed  to  the  con- 
jumction  originative  of  substance,  cannot  also  originate  disjuuction 
which  is  not  opposed  to  the  conjunction  originative  of  substance.  And 
that  which  originates  disjunction  which  is  not  opposed  to  the^  conjunc 
tion  originative  of  substance,  cannot  also  originate  disjunction  which 
is  opposed  to  the  conjunction  originative  of  substance." 

Objection. — Is  there  any  reason  for  taking  such  a  view  ? 


KANlDA  SftTRAS  VII,  2,  10.  231 


Answer. — Yes,  there  ia,  diversity  of  cause  being  rendered  necessary 
by  diversity  of  effect. 

Objection. — Variety  is  necessary  in  action,  so  that  one  action  may 
produce  disjunction  which  is  opposed  to  conjunction  originative  of 
substance,  as  in  the  case  of  flowering  lotus-blossoms,  etc-,  and  another 
action  may  produce  both,  i.  e.,  disjunctions  which  are  opposed  and  not 
-opposed  to  conjunctions  originative  of  substance. 

Answer. — This  cannot  be.  For  contrariety  of  effect  is  the  origin 
of  the  supposition  of  diversity  of  cause  ;  and  that  contrariety  arises 
lay  way  of  the  characteristic  of  the  one  being  the  counter-opposite  of 
conjunction  originative  of  substance,  but  by  way  of  the  characteristic 
of  the  other  not  being  the  counter-opposite  of  conjunction  originative 
-of  substance,  inasmuch  as  diversity  also  ought  to  be  supposed  by  those 
very  ways. 

This  same  action,  present  in  the  one  half  of  the  bamboo,  produces 
only  disjunction  of  the  two  halves.  And  this  disjunction  first  originates 
disjunction  from  the  particular  parts  of  ether,  etc., — disjunction  which 
is  not  the  counter-opposite  of  conjunction  originative  of  substance. 
And  if  it  produced  disjunction  by  itself,  it  would  then  bear  the  charac 
teristic  of  action  ;  hence  it  depends  upon  time  which  is  distinguished 
-with  the  possession  of  destruction  of  substance. 

Objection. — At  that  moment  also  let  that  action  itself  produce 
Disjunction. 

Answer. — It  cannot  do  so,  being  past  in  time.  In  the  production 
of  Disjunction,  Time  follows  immediately  after  the  production  of  action 
itself. 

Objection. — But  subsequent  Disjunction  being  thus  produced  by 
antecedent  Disjunction,  action  cannot  produce  conjunction  with  other 
places. 

Answer. — This  is  not  the  case  ;  for  towards  the  production  of  con 
junction,  action  is  not  past  time.  Otherwise,  action  will  be  never 
destroyed,  it  being  destructible  only  by  subsequent  conjunction. 

This  same  Disjunction,  destructible  by  subsequent  conjunction, 
lasts  for  three  moments  only.  Sometimes  it  is  destructible  by  destruc 
tion  of  substratum.  It  is  in  this  way  :  Action  is  produced  in  the  fibre 
which  is  a  constituent  part  of  the  thread  ;  Disjunction  of  two  fibres 
follows  it  ;  at  the  same  moment,  action  is  produced  in  another  thread  ; 
then  there  is  destruction  of  conjunction,  originative  of  the  thread,  by 
disjunctiou  of  two  fibres,  and  Disjunction  is  produced  by  action  in  the 
thread  ;  then  there  is  destruction  of  the  thread  from  destruction  of 
conjunction  originative  of  substance,  and  from  destruction  of  the 
thread  results  destruction  of  Disjunction  produced  by  action  in  another 
thread. 

Objection. — Such  being  the  case,  there  will  be  no  destruction  of 
action  produced  in  another  thread,  since  there  is  nothing  to  destroy 
it.  For,  it  can  be  destroyed  by  subsequent  conjunction,  but  Disjunction, 
being  destroyed,  there  is  no  subsequent  conjunction. 


282  VAI£E§IKA  PHILOSOPHY 

Answer.  —  The  argument  is  not  valid.  As  Disjunction  of  the  thread 
in  the  state  of  being  destroyed  is  produced  by  action  which  is  produced 
in  the  thread,  so  by  the  same  action  should  be  produced  Disjunction  of 
the  thread  from  the  fibre  also.  Such  Disjunction  also  is  really  opposed 
to  originative  conjunction.  By  this  Disjunction  of  the  fibre  and  the 
thread  is  produced  Disjunction  of  the  thread  and  ether,  which  produces 
subsequent  conjunction,  and  this,  in  its  turn,  causes  destruction  of 
action.  Or,  wherever  action  is  produced  in  a  thread,  action  is  pro 
duced  in  its  fibre  also.  That  action,  again,  in  the  thread  in  the  state 
of  being  destroyed,  originates  simultaneous  -Disjunctions  from  the 
constituent  parts  of  the  thread,  and  particular  parts  of  ether,  etc.,  all 
these  Disjunctions  being  not  opposed  to  originative  conjunction.  There 
is,  therefore,  destruction  of  action  combined  or  co-inherent  in  the 
thread,  by  conjunction  which  has  its  production  immediately  after  the 
Disjunction  of  the  effect,  e.  y.,  thread,  from  the  not-effect,  e.  g.,  ether, 
etc.,  produced  from  the  Disjunction  of  the  cause,  e.  <j.}  the  fibre,  and 
the  not-cause,  e.  g.,  ether  etc. 

Sometimes  Disjunction  is  destroyed  jointly  by  subsequent  conjunc 
tion  and  destruction  of  substratum.  It  is  in  this  way  :  There  beino- 
conjunction  of  a  thread,  and  a  thread,  action  is  produced  in  the  con 
stituent  parts  of  the  thread,  namely,  the  fibre,  and  action  is  produced 
in  the  reed.  This  is  one  moment  of  time.  By  action  in  the  fibre  is 
produced  Disjunction  from  another  fibre,  and  by  ;his  there  is  destruc 
tion  of  conjunction  originative  of  the  thread.  By  the  action  in  the 
reed  also,  there  is  Disjunction  of  the  thread  and  the  reed,  and 
there  is  also  destruction  of  the  conjunction  of  the  thread  and 
the  reed.  Destruction  of  the  thread  immediately  follow  destruction 
of  conjunction  originative  of  the  thread.  Conjunction  of  the  reed 
with  another  portion  of  space  immediately  'follows  destruction  of 
conjunction  of  the  thread  and  the  reed.  Jointly  from  both  of  them, 
viz.,  destruction  of  substratum,  and  conjunction,  results  destruction 
of  Disjunction.  —  10. 

Conjunction  and  Disjunction  do  not  possess  Conjunction  and  Disjunction. 

Upaakdra.  —  It   may  'be    said,  "  Let    there   be  Conjunction  in  Conjunetion   also,  and  Dis 
junction  in  Disjunction  also."     To  prorent  this  he  says  : 


I  R  I  \\  II 

Samyoga-vibhagayot,    in    Conjunction      and     Disjunc 


tion.  ^nttrf^TTTT^n^  Samyoga-vibhaga-abhavah,  non-existence  of  Con 
junction  and  Disjunction.  WJWTfr^Tvqi  Auutva-mahattvabhyam,  by 
minuteness  and  magnitude.  KJI^m^T:  Vyakhyatah,  explained. 

11.  The  non-existence  of  Conjunction  and  Disjunction,  in 
Conjunction  and  Disjunction,  is  explained  by  Minuteness  and 
Magnitude.  —  292. 

As  Minuteness  and  Magnitude  are  not  possessed  of  Minuteness  and 
Magnitude,  so  also  are  not  Conjunction  and  Disjunction  posaeaaed  of 
Conjunction  and  Disjunction.  —  11- 


KANADA  SUTRAS  VII,  2,13.  233 


Actions  are  void  of  actions,  and  Attributes,  of  attributes. 


r:  Karmmabhih,  by  actions.  ^T*?!f^r  Karmmani,  actions.  »£$: 
Grunaih,  by  attributes.  JT^:  Guuah,  attributes.  %f  H^^T^Issn  Anutva- 
mahattvabhyam,  by  minuteness  and  magnitude.  ffrT  Iti,  this. 

12.  Actions  are  (void)  of  Actions  ;  Attributes  are  (void)  of 
Attributes.  This  (is  explained)  by  Minuteness  and  Magnitude. 
—  293. 

Upaskara.—  This  second  aphorism  has  been  already  explained.     (Vide  VII.  i.  15  supra). 

Bhdsya.  reads  VII.  ii.  12  as  two  aphorisms  viz.,  Karmabhirkar- 
mdni  yunair-gundh  and  Anutvamahattvabhydmiti,  and  explains  them 
in  the  same  way  as  VII.  i,  16. 

Conjunction  and  Disjunction  of  effect  and  cause  do  not  exist. 

Upaskdra.  —  If  it  be  asked  why  there  cannot  be  conjunction    of    two   substances,   namely 
of  constituent  part  and  constituted  whole,  so  he  says  : 


II  v»  I  *  I 


Yutasiddhi-abhavat,  in  consequence  of  the  absence 
of  separate  or  independent  existence.  ^TF3!  *  K*u4t«  Karyya-Karanayoh, 
of  effect  and  cause.  ^*^TJTf=t*n'M  Samyoga-vibhagau,  Conjunction  and 
Disjunction.  !f  Na,  not.  feef%  Vidyete,  exist. 

13.  In  consequence  of  the  absence  of  separate  existence, 
there  exist  not  Conjunction  and  Disjunction  of  effect  and  cause. 
—294. 

'  Yutasiddhih  '  means  the  state  of  being  existent,  of  two  things 
•which  have  no  connection  with  each  other,  or  the  characteristic  of 
being  supported  by  separate  substrata.  A  constituent  part  and  a  con 
stituted  whole,  however,  do  not  possess  this.  This  is  the  meaning.  —  13. 

VivTiti.  —  *  Yutasiddhih'  means  the  existence  of  two  uncombined 
things.  Of  cause  and  effect,  e.  g.,  of  constituent  part  and  constituted 
whole,  conjunction  and  disjunction  do  not  exist,  because  of  the  absence 
of  their  uncombined  existence.  For  constituted  wholes  such  as  a  water*- 
pot,  etc.,  do  not  exist  having  no  relation  to  constituent  parts  such  as 
potsherds,  etc.,  whereby  their  conjunction  and  disjunction  might  be 
possible. 

The  relation  between  a  word  and  its  meaning  is  neither  conjunction 

nor  combination. 

Upaskdra.—  ~  Now  follows   from  the   context   another    section  'intended    to  establish  the 
•conventional  relation  of  words  and  objects.    Therein  he  states  an  adverse  argumint. 


234 


II  vs  I  ^  | 

>  because  it  is  an  attribute. 

14.     (There  can  be  no  conjunction  of  Sound   or    Words    with 
Objects),  because  (Conjunction,  is  an  Attribute.  —  295. 

'  Of  conjunction  *-  -  this  is  the  complement.  Thus,  the  meaning  isr 
how  can  there  be  conjunction  which  is  an  attribute,  of  an  attribute, 
e.  g.,  Sound  or  Word,  with  objects  sujh  a  water  pot,  etc.  ?  —  -14. 

Above  continued. 

Upaxkdra.  —  Moreover,  the  object  also  is  sometimes  characterised  as  colour,  taste,  eto.r 
Therefor*,  conjunction  is  riot  possible,  inasmuch  as  the  existence  of  attribute  in  an  attribute^ 
has  not  been  admitted.  This  is  what  he  says  : 


n 

nm:  Gunah,  attribute.  ?ffa  A  pi,  a^3()-  f^TT5^  Vibhavyate,  is  known 
or  established. 

15.  Attribute  also  is  known  (to  be  an  object  denoted  by 
Word),  or  is  established  (by  Word).—  296. 

1  Attribute  also,  object'  —  this  is  the  complete  sentence.  Attribute 
also,  e.  <JT.,  colour,  etc.,  is  an  object  denoted  by  Word,  but  with  that 
there  is  no  relation  of  conjunction.  This  is  the  meaning.  Or,  the 
meaning  is  that  attribute  also  is  established  (by  being  denoted)  by  Word 
and  that  with  that  there  is  no  relation  of  conjunction  of  Word.  —  15. 

Above  continued. 

Upaskdra.  —  .Further,  conjunction  (of  Word  and  Object)  cannot  be  produced  by  th<r 
action  of  either  or  by  the  action  of  both,  because  any  substance  whatever,  <>,.  g.,  Ether,  etc., 
as  well  as  Word  are  inert.  This  is  what  he  says  : 


u  ^  i  R  i  \\  ii 


fM^T?TT^,  Niskriyatvat,  because  of  inactivity  or  inertness. 
16.     Because  Word  and  Object  are  inert.  —  297. 

4  Of  Word  and  of    any  Object    whatever'  —  Such  is  the    complement 
of^the  aphorism.  —  16. 

Above  continued. 
Upaskdra.  —  He  states  another  obstruction  to  the  inter-relation  (of  Word  and  Object)  : 


u  v*  i  ^  i  ?vs  u 


Asati,  not  existing.  !f  ?rf^T  Na  asti,  (It)    does  not  exist,    ^frf  Iti 
such,  q  Cha,  and.  SpftTI^  Prayogat,  because  there  is  application. 


KANADA  SftTRAS  VII,  2,  1§.  235 

17,  (Word  and  Object  are  not  in  conjunction),  also  because 
in  the  case  of  a  non-existent  object  there  is  such  application  (of 
word)  as  "  (It)  does  not  exist."—  298. 

Even  in  the  case  cf  a  non-existent  water-pot,  cloth,  etc.,  such 
application  (of  word)  is  observed  as  "  There  is  no  water-pot  in  the 
room,"  "  Cloth  does  not  exist,"  "The  letter  r/ajwhich  was  heard  before, 
no  longer  exists,"  5'  There  was  a  cloth,"  '  There  will  be  a  cloth,'  etc.  ; 
therefore  (there  is  no  inter-relation)  This  is  the  meaning.  The  import 
accordingly  is  that  there  is  no  conjunction,  nor  again  combination, 
•of  Word  with  a  non-existent  water-pot,  etc.  —  17. 

Word  and  Object  are  unrelated. 
Upaskdra.—  What  then  ?     He  gives  the  answer  : 


&abda-arthau,  sound  and  sense.     Word  and  object. 
Asambandhau,  unrelated. 

18.     (Therefore),  Word  and  Object  are  unrelated.  —  299. 

If  Conjunction  of  Word  and  Object    does  not  exist,  it  then  comes  to 
this  that  Word  and  Object  are  unrelated.     This  is  the  meaning.  —  18. 

Above  continued. 

{Jpaskdra  _  It   may    be   asked   why   one   or   other   of   the   relations  of   Conjunction   and 
Combination  should   not  exist   (between  Word  and  Object).     Accordingly  he  says  : 

n 


Samyoginah,  which  is  in  conjunction.  The  conjunct. 
Dandat,  from  the  staff.  Wflfrr:  Samabayinah,  which  is  in  combination. 
The  combined.  f^t<*T^  Visesat,  from  a  distinction  or  distinguishing 
element.  ^  Cha,  and. 

19.  (Cognition  of  Conjunction  results)  from  (e.  £.,)  the 
staff  which  is  in  conjunction  (with  the  hand  of  a  man),  and  (of 
Combination)  from  a  distinguishing  element  which  is  in  combina 
tion  (with  the  whole).—  300. 

"  This  person  is  carrying  a  staff,"  "  The  elephant  possesses  a 
trunk  "—these  intuitions  take  place.  Of  these,  the  first  results  from 
conjunction,  and  the  second,  from  combination.  The  intuition  in 
respect  of  the  trunk  which  is  a  particular  member  of  the  body,  is  depen 
dent  upon  its  combination  with  the  elephant,  since  it  arises  from  the 
distinction  that  that  is  an  elephant  to  which  belongs  a  trunk  as  being  m 
combination  with  it.  The  distinction  itself,  viz.,  the  trunk,  etc.,  is  distinc 
tive  in  consequence  of  the  relation  of  combination.  But  there  is  no  intui 
tion  of  threads,  etc.  also,  such  as  "  A  cloth  possesses  threads  "  ete., 
under  the  relation  of  distinctive  possession  of  the  parts.  Likewise, 
•"  The  object,  water-pot,  is  that  which  possesses  the  word,  water-pot,"  — 


236  VAI^ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY 

such  intuition    does  not    take  place.     Of  Word    and    Object,    therefore 
tport!l.l9  ""iwurtioi.,    nor    again    oombinatj      This    is   & 

Intuition  of  object  from  word  proceed*  from  convention. 

^a^5T^T:  N  vs  |  R  |  ^o  || 

*wfor:   Samayikah,  conventional.  According  to  direction.  w*m; 
babda-artha-pratyajah,  intuition  of  object  from  word. 

20      The  intuition  of  Object  from  Word  (takes  place)  accord 
ing  to  the  direction  (of  God).—  301. 


. 

object.     The  same  is  convention,  depended  ^  upor  tL  wm  of  Co  1    f   V 
example,    -Whatever  plant  the  ichneumo     tw£^Mito£*h     ?i 
antidote  to  poison.-     This  is  the  meaning.  'h'    1S  an 


This    convention    is    learnt    sometimes    from    usage;,,/,     when 
employer    gives    the    order    -Bring    the    water-pot/'     and  an  employe* 

?n£g,%hU  k  J8C     rST:\?  VUbUlai>    "eCk>    a    W    standing  Tear  Jby 
infers  the  knowledge  of   the   latter  in    this    way.     This    his 

produced  by  knowledge,  because  it    is  activity?  like  my    aotf±     {ha 
knowledge  again    is  produced  by  the  words   of    this    o/der,    because 
follows  immediately  after  it;  and  the  subject-matter  of  this    know™d«re 
namely,  this  object  with  a  tubular  neck/is  the  denotation  of   the    term' 
water-pot.     By  such  processes  of  transposition  of  verbs  and    cases 
boy  becomes  informed  in  respect  of  the  object,  water-pot,  cloth    etc. 

Sometimes  the  convention  is  learnt  directly  from  testimony  alone  • 
e.g     that  this  tubular-necked  object    is  designated  by  the   term,    water 
pot.     Sometimes    it  is    learnt  from  comparison;  e.g.,   from  a  con  prison 

cow  Tat    a11,0!  ^    T      CaS6S    aS',Uiata    Wa^«  that  which  isP  like  a 
w     that    as    is    mudga     so    is  mudya-parni  (a  kind  of  bean),  that  as  is 

edVe  of°obiecrf7ia;-U  ?,  fle*™'"?»  ^^  etc.  Sometimes  (know! 
•f  objects  is  derived)  from  condemnatory  passages  also-  e  a  «0 
the  camel  with  too  pendulous  upper  lip  and  long  neokf  the  eater  of  hard 
thorns,  the  vilest  of  animals»-when  after  hearing  'this  condenatory 
sentence  one  sees  a  body  of  this  description,  knowledge  arises  in  one 
tm  ^  "This  is  that  camel/'  Sometimes  it  springs  from  commun  ty  of 
substratum,  or  synonymy,  with  words  of  known  import;  .  T  "The 
honey-bee  ,s  sipping  the  honey  with,  n  cloven  lotus-blossoms^-after 
hearing  this  proposition,  (the  knowledge  arises),  "This  is  what  is  desig 
nated  by  the  term,  honey-bee,  because  it  is  the  sipper  of  honey  within 
cloven  lotus-blossoms,"  or  as  in  the  case  of  the  proposition,  -The  cuckoo. 
sings  sweetly  ,n  the  mango-tree.-  Here,  in  the  above  instances,  it's- 

.ther  a  case  of  inference,  or  a  case  of  word  itself  being    productive    of 


KANiDA  StTTRAS  VII,  2,  20.  237 

knowledge  through  the  force  of  synonymy  with  words  of  known  import, 
or  only  a  particular  mode  of  comparison  or  analogy,  inasmuch  as  the 
being  the  agent  in  drinking  honey  infers  resemblance  to  other 
individuals  such  as  the  bee,  etc. 

The  convention,  again,  has  reference  to  classes  only,  individuals 
being  brought  home  by  means  of  special  characteristics,  —  such  is  the 
view  of  the  followers  of  Tutdta.  According  to  the  followers  of  Prabhd- 
kara,  the  force  of  word  is  in  respect  of  both  the  class  and  the  individual, 
but  so  far  as  it  refers  to  the  class,  it  denotes  the  object  by  the  word,  by 
being  known,  and  so  far  as  it  refers  to  the  individual,  by  being  its 
proper  form.  The  teaching  of  the  ancients  or  elders  is  that  convention 
is  the  force  itself  and  that  classes  appearing  in  the  forms  of  the  indi 
viduals  are  the  objects  denoted  by  words.  This  is  the  case  with  words- 
like  cow,  etc.,  but  the  objects  denoted  by  words  expressive  of  attribute 
and  action  are  both  classes  and  individuals  as  detailed  in  the 


l.  —  He    now    points    out    the    connection    between  words  and 
objects,  which  is  the  means  of  verbal   knowledge. 

*  *  *  •  <  gamaya  '  is  arbitrament  or  convention.  It  is  two 
fold,  eternal  and  modern.  Eternal  arbitrament  is  called  force  (of 
words),  and  modern  arbitrament  is  called  definition.  Arbitrament  has 
for  its  form,  This  object  is  to  be  understood  from  this  word,  or  Let  this 
word  convey  this  signification.  Accordingly  it  has  been  said, 


Convention  has  been  declared  to  be  two-fold,  original  and  modern. 
Therein  the  original  is  the  eternal,  which  is  called  force;  whereas  the 
modorn  is  the  occasional,  imposed  by  scientific  writers  and  others. 

The  apprehension  of  the  force  of  words  proceeds  from  conduct,. 
etc.  So  it  has  been  said, 


The  elders  declare  the  apprehension  of  the  force  of  words  to  proceed 
from  grammatical  analysis  or  etymology,  from  comparison  or  analogy, 
from  lexicography,  from  authoritative  sayings  or  testimony,  from  co.i- 
duct  (of  the  employer  who  gives  an  order  which  is  carried  out  by  the 
employed,,  from  contiguity  to  a  wordof  well-known  import,  from  context, 
and  from  explication  or  description. 

*  The  doctrine  of  the  force  of  the  word  to  denote 
primarily  the  class  is  not  sound,  for,  in  such  instances  as  "  Bring  the 
cow,"  the  fact  which  is  established  by  experience,  namely,  that  the  indi 
vidual  is  the  object  of  verbal  cognition,  cannot  be  explained  except  on. 


238  VAI£E§IKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

the  theory  of  the  force  of  the  word  primarily  to  denote  the  individual. 
Nor  does  the  knowledge  of  the  individual  arise  from  implication  or 
derivatively,  for  in  the  absence  of  a  primary  use  a  derivative  use  ia  im 
possible.  Nor  is  the  knowledge  of  the  individual  possible  even  by  the 
equivalence  of  the  act  and  the  object  of  cognition  (in  verbal  knowledge); 
for,  inasmuch  as  the  being  an  object  of  verbal  cognition,  standing  in  the 
position  of  an  effect,  must  be  produced  by  a  cause,  the  equivalence  of  the 
act  and  the  object  of  cognition  (in  verbal  knowledge;  which  is  sun  >osed 
to  be  the  condition,  cannot  be  the  condition  there,  as  is  desired  We 
should,  therefore,  respect  the  doctrine  that  the  force  of  the  words  cow 
etc.,  lies  in  denoting  the  individual  charaterised  by,  or  possessing,  the 
generic  form  and  the  class  or  the  universal.  It  has  been  a;;-  u-dingly 
laid  down  in  the  aphorism  of  Gautama,  "  The  individual,  the  generic 
form,  and  the  universal  are,  however,  the  object  of  the  word."  (Nydya- 
S&tram,  II.  ii  63). 

Priority  and  Posteriority,  how  produced. 

l7pankdra.—'Now  he  explains  Priority  and  Posteriority,  the  next  in  the  order  of 
enumeration,  in  one  context,  as  these  are  the  causes  of  mutually  iuvolved  USOH,  and  for  the 
purpose  of  clearing  up  the  understanding  of  the  disciples  as  well  as  for  bhe  sake  of  brevity. 


ii  v*  m  *t  n 


Eka-dikkabhyam,  lying  in  the  same  direction. 
Ekakalabhyam,  existing  at  the  same  time  *TflT£gfrjT£eT*<lT  Sannikrista- 
vipkraristabhyam,  near  and  remote.  ^  Paratn,  prior,  SPTC  Aparam  pos 
terior.  <g  Cha,  and. 

21.  The  Prior  and  the  Posterior  (are  produced  by  two 
objects)  lying  in  the  same  direction,  existing  at  the  same  time, 
and  being  near  and  remote.  —  302. 

"  The  Prior  and  the  Posterior'  —  the  reference  here  is  principally  in 
a  substantive  sense.  "  Are  produced"—  such  is  the  complement.  Or,  the 
word  "usage"  or  "convention"  is  to  be  supplied  after  'The  Prior  and  the 
Posterior  :  such'.  The  word  "such"  should  be  understood.  'Ekadikkabhyam' 
means  by  two  bodies  which  have  the  same  direction  in  space.  Two  bodies 
•occupying  equal  place  (i.  e.,  equally  distant)  may  also  have  the  same 
direction  in  space,  but  by  them  Priority  and  Posteriority  are  neither 
produced,  nor  come  into  use.  Accordingly  it  has  been  said,  'Near  and 
remote,'  which  expression  means,  possessing  nearness,  i.e.,  the  quality  or 
state  of  containing  a  smaller  number  of  conjunctions  with  the  conjunct, 
and  remoteness,  i.  e.,  the  quality  or  state  of  containing  a  larger  number 
of  con  junctions  with  the  conjunct.  Hereby  combinative  cause  (of 
Priority  and  Posteriority)  is  stated  ;  whereas  conjunction  of  bodies  and 
direction  in  space  is  the  non-combinative  cause.  Priority  and  Porteri- 
ority  are  thus  produced  in  a  man  standing  with  his  face  towards  the  east, 
by  observing  a  relative  paucity  of  conjunctions  with  the  conjunct  in 
one  of  two  bodies  lying  in  the  east  and  a  relative  plurality  of  conjunc 
tions  with  the  conjuct  in  the  other.  The  non-comcinative  cause  is  thus 


KANlDA  StiTRAS  VII,  2,  21.  239 

stated.  'Near  and  remote' — the  term  implies  intuition,  as  the  contained 
metaphorically  denotes  the  container.  Relative  understanding  or 
cognition  of  relativity  is  thus  stated  to  be  the  efficient  cause.  Priority 
and  Posteriority  are  produced  in  respect  only  of  two  bodies  lying  in 
the  same  direction  in  space  ;  hence  there  is  no  production  of  them  in 
all  places.  Relative  understanding  is  produced  in  One  and  the  same 
observer  only  ;  hence  there  is  no  production  of  them  in  all  circums 
tances.  Being  regulated  by  relative  understanding,  there  is  no  produc 
tion  of  them  at  all  times.  There  is  no  mutual  dependence  between 
them,  inasmuch  as  being  produced  from  the  capacity  or  power  of  the 
cause,  they  are  proved  by  sense-perception.  For  otherwise  they  would 
be  neither  produced  nor  perceived.  For  in  case  of  mutual  dependence 
there  would  be  non-production  as  well  as  non-perception  of  both 
of  them.  But  Priority  and  Posteriority  are  perceived,  and  their 
perception  cannot  be  possible  without  their  production. 

'  Existing  at  the  same  time  ' — this  has  reference  to  Priority  and 
Posteriority  in  time.  Now  'existing  at  the  same  time'  means,  by  two 
bodies  one  young  and  the  other  old,  which  occupy  the  same,  i.  e.,  the 
present,  time.  Here  nearness  is  the  state  of  having  the  birth  intervened 
by  a  fewer  number  of  revolutions  of  the  sun,  and  remoteness  is  the 
state  of  having  the  birth  intervened  by  a  larger  number  of  revolutions 
of  the  sun.  Here  too  understanding  i.  e.,  the  container,  is  implied  by 
the  contained.  Thus  the  young  and  old  bodies  are  the  combinative 
causes.  Conjunction  of  tirno  and  bodies  is  the  non-combinative  cause. 
The  understanding  of  the  state  of  having  the  birth  intervened  by  a- 
fewer  number  of  revolutions  of  the  sun  is  the  efficient  cause  in  the  case 
of  Posteriority,  and  the  understanding  of  the  state  of  having  the  birth 
intervened  by  a  larger  number  of  revolutions  of  the  sun  is  the  efficient 
cause  in  the  case  of  Priority, 

These,  Priority  and  Posteriority,  again,  are  produced  even  in 
respect  of  bodies  indeterminate  in  place  and  direction  in  space. 

Now  there  is  a  seven-fold  destruction  of  Priority  and  Posteriority 
iu  space  but  their  production  is  simultaneous,  else  there  would  be 
mutual  dependence.  Priority  and  Posteriority  in  space  then  are 
destroyed  from  the  destruction  of  relative  understanding  (1)  from  the 
destruction  of  conjunction  which  is  the  non-combinative  cause,  (2) 
from  the  destruction  of  substance  which  is  the  combinative  cause,  (3) 
from  the  destruction  of  the  efficient  and  non-combinative  causes,  (4} 
from  the  destruction  of  the  efficient  and  combinative  causes,  (5)  from, 
the  desi ruction  of  the  efficient  cause,  (6)  from  the  destruction  of  the 
non-combinative  cause,  and  (7)  from  the  destruction  of  the  combinative 
cause.  Now,  from  the  destruction  of  relative  understanding,  thus: 
Production  of  Priority  ;  knowledge  of  the  genus  Priority  ;  then  destruc 
tion  of  relative  understanding  ;  after  its  destruction,  at  the  moment  of 
knowledge  of  substance  distinguished  by  Priority,  destruction  of 
Priority, — the  process  should  be  understood  in  the  same  way  as  in  the 
case  of  destruction  of  duality.  Destruction  of  Priority  and  Posteriority 
follows  also  from  the  destruction  of  the  non-combinative  cause.  Thus,  as 
soon  as  there  is  relative  understanding,  action  takes  place  in  'the  body 
which  is  the  substratum  of  Priority  ;  as  soon  as  Priority  is  produced 
therefrom,  disjunction  takes  place  between  direction  in  space  and  the 


240  VAI!§ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

body  ;  after  it,  when  there  is  knowledge  of  the  genus  Priority,  then  there 
is  destruction  of  the  conjunction  of  direction  in  space  and  the  body  ;  then, 
destruction  of  relative  understanding  follows  knowledge  of  the  genus  ;  at 
the  very  same  moment,  destruction  -of  Priority  and  Posteriority  results 
from  destruction  of  conjunction  of  direction  in  space  and  the  bodies. 
And  in  this  case  destruction  of  relative  understanding  does  not  destroy 
them,  inasmuch  as  it  is  synchronous  with  destruction  of  Priority. 

Objection. — On  the  theory  of  destruction  of  attribute  even  from  de 
struction  of  non-combinative  cause,  great  confusion  will  result  from 
the  thus  possible  destruction  of  Samskdra,  (tendencies,  impressions), 
adristam  (invisible  after-effects  of  acts  performed),  etc.,  also  from  the 
destruction  of  the  conjunction  of  Mind  and  Soul. 

Answer. — It  is  not  so.  For  Priority  being  pervaded  by  the  char 
acteristic  of  being  remote,  there  must  needs  be  cessation  of  Priority 
consequent  on  the  non-existence  of  remoteness  on  the  removal  of  the 
substratum  of  Priority  to  some  other  place-  Nor  is  there  at  the  time 
any  other  agent  of  destruction  ;  hence,  such  destruction  being  other 
wise  impossible,  destruction  of  conjunction  alone  is  conceived  to  be 
the  destroying  agent.  Ou  the  other  hand  samskdra,  adristam  etc.,  as 
well  as  their  effects,  e.  g.,  recollection,  pleasure,  etc.,  cannot  be  suppos 
ed  to  be  so  destroyed,  inasmuch  as  they  are  observed  even  after  a 
long  time. 

This  also  implies  that  Priority  and  Posteriority  are  destroyed  also 
"by  the  destruction  of  the  conjunction  between  that  particular  place 
and  the  standard  limit  as  well -as  the  observer,  the  argument  being  the 
same  as  above. 

Destruction  of  Priority  sometimes  results  also  from  destruction  of 
combinative  cause.  Thus,  relative  understanding  arises  at  the  very 
same  moment  that  action  produced  in  a  portion  of  a  body  causes  dis 
junction  from  another  portion  ;  from  disjunction  results  destruction  of 
the  conjunction  originative  of  the  body,  and  then  production  of 
Priority  ;  at  the  next  moment,  destruction  of  substance  results  from 
destruction  of  conjunction,  and  there  takes  place  knowledge  of  the 
genus  Priority  ;  destruction  of  Priority  follows  destruction  of  substance, 
and  destruction  of  relative  understanding  follows  knowledge  of  the 
genus.  So  that,  being  synchronous,  destruction  of  relative  understand 
ing  does  not  destroy  Priority. 

Destruction  of  Priority  sometimes  takes  place  by  the  destruction 
of  substance  and  destruction  of  relative  understanding.  It  happens 
in  this  way  :  Production  of  action  and  relative  understanding  in  a 
portion  of  the  body  ;  then,  disjunction  from  another  portion,  and  pro 
duction  of  Priority  ;  next  desruction  of  originative  conjunction  and 
knowledge  of  the  genus  ;  thereafter,  destruction  of  substance  and  des 
truction  of  relative  understanding  ,  and  following  them,  there  is  destruc 
tion  of  Priority. 

Destruction  of  Priority  takes  place  sometimes  from  destruction  of 
substance  and  destruction  of  conjunction.  It  is  in  this  way  :  Simultane 
ously  with  disjunction  amongst  the  constituent  parts  of  substance, 


KANlDA  SftTRAS.VII,2,  22.  241 

there  is  production  of  action  in  the  body  and  of  relative  understand 
ing  ;  following  it,  appear  destruction  of  conjunction  of  constituent 
parts,  disjunction  between  space  and  body,  and  production  of  Priority  -, 
thereafter  there  are-  destruction  of  substance,  destruction  of  conjunc 
tion  of  space  and  body,  and  production  of  knowledge  of  the  genus  : 
thereafter  destruction  of  Priority  results  from  destruction  of  substance 
and  destruction  of  conjunction  of  space  and  body,  and  destruction  of 
relative  understanding  from  knowledge  of  the  genus. 

Destruction  of  Priority  takes  place  sometimes  from  destruction  of 
conjunction  and  destruction  of  relative  understanding.  It  is  in  this 
way  :  Production  of  Priority,  and  action  in  the  body  ;  knowledge  of 
1  the  genus,  and  disjunction  ;  destruction  of  relative  understanding,  and 
destruction  .of  conjunction  of  space  and  the  body  •  then,  destruction 
of  Priority. 

Destruction  of  Priority  results  sometimes  from  destructions  of 
combinative,  non-combinative  and  efficient  causes.  It  is  in  this  way  : 
Production  of  Priority,  disjunction  among  constituent  parts  of  the 
body,  and  action  in  the  body,  take  place  simultaneously  ;  knowledge  of 
the  geauj  Priority,  destruction  of  conjunction  of  constituent  parts  and 
disjunction  between  space  and  the  body  follow  them  ;  thereafter  results 
destruction  of  Priority  or  of  Posteriority  in  space,  from  destruction 
pf  »  relative  understanding,  destruction  of  substance,  and  destruction 
of  conjunction  of  space  and  the  body,  which  destructions  are  simultane 
ously  produced. 

Of  Priority  and  Posteriority  in  time,  however,  there  is  no  destruction 
due  to  destruction  of  non-combinative  cause.  As  in  the  case  of  Priority 
and  Posteriority  in  space,  there  is  destruction  of  nearness  and  remoteness 
on  the  destruction  of  conjunction  of  space  and  the  body,  ao  it  is  not  the 
case  with  Priority  and  Posteriorityin  time.  The  three  cases,  therefore, 
of  their  destruction  namely  from  destruction  of  combinative  cause,  from 
destruction  of  relative  understanding,  and  from  both  jointly,  should  be 
understood  in  the  way  described  above.  —  21. 

Vivriti.  —  It  should  be  observed  that,  according  to  the  writer  of 
Muktdvali,  destruction  of  relative  understanding  is  destructive  of 
Priority  and  Posteriority  in  both  their  forms  (i.  e.,  in  space  and  in 
time),  whereas  in  the  Upaskdra  it  is  stated  that  it  is  the  destruction  of 
their  three-fold  causes  which  is  destructive  of  Priority  and  Posteriority. 

Priority  and  Posteriority  in  21ime)  how  produced. 
UpasM.ra.-~  He  states  a  peculiarity  in  the  oase  of  temporal  priority  and  posteriority. 


Karana-paratvat,  from  priority  of  the  cause. 
Karanaaparatvat,  from  posteriority  of  the  cause.  "^  Cha,  and. 

22.  (Temporal  Priority  and  temporal  Posteriority  are  said, 
by  suggestion,  to  arise  respectively)  from  Priority  of  the  cause  and 
from  Posteriority  of  the  cause.  —  303. 


242  VAlgE§IKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

The  cause  of  Priority  and  Posteriority  is  time.  Priority  and 
Posteriority  belong  to  it.  Conjunction  of  time  which  is  the  non- 
combinative  cause  of  priority,  and  conjunction  of  time  which  is  tfre 
non-combinative  cause  of  posteriority  are  stated,  by  implication,  as 
otherswise,  the  result  would  b«  want  of  congruity  or  syntactical 
connexion.  For,  priority  and  posteriority  cannot  be  produced  by 
priority  and  posteriority  themselves.  The  terms,  priority  and  posteri 
ority,  denote,  by  implication,  conjunctions  cf  time  which  are  productive 
of  them.  —  22. 

Vivfiti.  —  If  the  uses  of  prior  (remote)  and  posterior  (near)  are  pro 
duced  by  cognitions  of  remoteness  and  nearness,  then,  inasmuch  as  the 
cognition,  Ka4i  (Benares)  is  near  in  relation  to  Prayaga  (Allahabad), 
refers  also  to  Prayaga  as  its  object  subject-matter,  why  does  not  there 
arise  the  use  of  Posteriority  (or  nearness)  in  respect  of  Prayaga  ?  Lite- 
wise,  why  is  there  not  the  use  of  Priority  (or  remoteness),  i»  respect  of 
Kasi,  etc.,  which  also  become  the  subject-matter  of  the  cognition  of 
remoteness  ? 

He  removes  this  incidental  doubt. 

1  Karana-paratvat,'  i.  e.,  owing  to  the  priority  or  remoteness  of  the 
combinative  cause  ;  and  also  owing  to  its  posteriority  or  nearness.  1  he 
uses  of  priority  and  posteriority  are  only  in  respect  of  the  combinative 
cause,  but  not  in  respect  of  anything  else  simply  because  it  becomes  tn/e 
subject-matter  of  relative  understanding.  For  use  is  detemiued  by  1$he 
object  in  respect  of  which  the  use  arises.  This  is  the  import. 

Priority  and  Posteriority  do  not  exist  in  Priority  and  Posteriority. 


II  V9  I  *  I  3    II 


Paratva-aparatvayoh,    in     priority    and    posteriority. 
Paratva-aparatra-abhavah,     non-existence    of    priority 


and  posteriority.  SH^Mfcfsrp^n    Anutva-mahattvabhy&m,    by   minuteness 
and    magnitude.    cqronft:    Vyakhyatafc,  explained. 

23.  The  non-existence  of  Priority  and  Posteriority,  in  Priority 
and  Posteriority,  is  explained  by  mintuteness  and  magnitude. 
—304. 

Actions  are  -void  of  actions. 


II  vs  I  R  I  W  II 


KarmiDabhih,    by  actions   qrwrffor         Karmmani,  actions. 
24.     Actions  are  (void)  of  Actions.  —  305. 

Attributes  are  void  of  attributes. 


KANlDA  SfrTRAS  VII,  2,  26.  243 

ip^:   Gunailj,  by  attributes.  3TWT:  GunAh.  attributes. 
25.     Attributes  are  (void)  of  Attributes.—  306. 

CTpa«fclra.-»-Those    aphorisms,    being    rirfcually     explained    above,    are    nofc    explained 
here.—  23,  24,  25. 

VIL  ii.  24  and  25  aa  one  aphorism. 
Combination 


{7paskJra.—I»  haa  been  stated  that  priority,  posteriority,  etc.,  are   combined   in    deng» 
or  corporal  substances  only,  'and  that  knowledge,  pleasure  etc.,  are  combined  in  the  soul.  Now 
what  ia  this   combination  itself  ?     Hating  regard   to  this   inquiry  of   the   disciples,   he   steps 
ov»r  Understanding  which  is  the  next  subject  for  treatment  according  to  the  order  of  enuruer#- 
ifeu,  and  describes  the  examination  of  Combination. 

:  II  v$  I  ^  i 


{f  Iha,  here,  4.  e.,  in  the  cause.  ff*j  Idam,  this,  i.  &.,  the  effect. 
f%  Iti,  such.  HT  Yatah,  whence.  VT^f^TCCfr  Karyya-karanayofc,  qf 
effect  arid  cause  tf:  Salj,  that.  ^WUfi  Samavayab^,  combination. 


26.     That  is  Combination  by  virtue  of  which  (arises  the  intui 
tion)    in  the    foim    of  "  This    is  here/'    with  regard  to  effect  and 
.'—  307. 


'  .^Aryya-karanayob/  is  an  indication  ;  non-effect  and  non-cause 
also  are  implied.  So  it  has  been  said  in  the  section  called  the  Locality 
of  the  Predicables,  "  Combination  is  that  relation  of  things  mutually 
involved  or  associated  in  nature  and  bearing  to  one  another  the 
relation  of  the  contained  and  the  container,  —  -which  ia  the  source  of 
intuition  in  the  form  of  "  (It  is)  here.""  Ayuta  siddhih,  inseparable 
association,  is  the  non-existence  of  things  unrelated.  As  in  the  case 
of  "  There  is  curd  here  in  the  bowl,"  "  There  are  jujubes  here  in  th.e 
bowl,"  so  in  the  case  of  "  There  is  cloth  here  in  the  threads,"  "  Ther.e 
is  mat  here  in  the  reeds,"  "  There  are  substance,  attribute,  and  action 
Here  in  substance,"  "  There  is  bovineness  here  in  the  cow,"  "  There  is 
knowledge  here  in  the  soul,"  "  There  is  Sound  here  in  Ether,"  the 
cognition  of  here  which  is  thus  produced,  cannot  be  produced  without 
somo  relation  ;  whereby  it  is  inferred  that  some  relation  exists.  And 
this  relation  is  not  mere  conjunction.  For  the  causes  of  conjunction, 
namely,  action  or  either  of  the  two  things,  etc.,  are  absent  here  ;  it  does 
not  terminate  in  disjunction  ;  related  things  do  not  exist  unrelated  ;  it 
can  be  inferred  as  a  uniform  substratum  ;  it  is  not  perceptible  to  the 
senses  ;  it  is  one  ;  and  it  is  eternal. 

Objection.  —  If  combination  be  one,  it  would  then  entail  intermix 
ture  of  substance-ness,  etc  ,  since  combination  of  action-ness,  etc., 
would  be  possible  in  substance. 

-  Answer.  —  This  cannot  be  the  case,  since  non-intermixture  follows 
from  tke  very  rule  of  the  container  and  the  contained.  Although  the 
same  combination  which  is  the  combination  of  substance-neas.  is  also 
the  comibation  of  attribute-ness,  action-ness,  etc.,  still  substance 
is  not  their  container  or  substratum,  since  they  are  not  observed  there. 


244  VAlSESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

Substance-ness  is  observed  in  substances  only,  attribute-ness  in  '  attri 
butes  only,  action-ness  in  actions  only,  but  not  elsewhere.  It  is  from 
the  observation  of  this  agreement  and  difference,  that  the  uniformity 
(of  the  container  and  the  contained)  results.  As  even  in  the  absence 
of  a  particular  conjunction  between  the  bowl  and  the  curd,  it  is  the 
bowl  which  is  the  container,  and  not  the  curd,  and  hence  there  is  the 
uniformity  of  the  relation  of  the  container  and  the  contained,  so  the 
uniformity  is  valid  in  this  case  also  from  the  very  difference  of  the 
power  of  the  revealed  and  the  revealer,  for  action-ness,  etc.,  are  not 
revealed  by  substance  in  the  same  way  as  substance-ness  is.  Accord 
ingly  it  has  been  said. 

*rfa^  ft  *m^  3*tqj|ir  *:  «**K  » 

All-powerful  consciousness  is, verily  our  resource  in  the  apprehen 
sion  of  things.  For  consciousness  in  respect  of  the  being  the' container 
is  not  reversible  ;  nor  is  there  the  intuition  that  substance  is  action  ; 
nor,  again,  that  threads  are  in  the  cloth.  It  is  for  this  reason  thatr 
notwithstanding  the  combination  of  colour  in  Air;  "  There  is  colour  ia 
Air" — such  characteristic  of  being  the  container  is  not  observed  in 
the  case  of  Air.  It  is  natural  capacity ,  therefore,  which  everywhere 
determines  the  relation  of  the  container  and  the  contained. 

This  combination,  again,  is  eternal,  inasmuch  as  it  is  uncaused. 
For  the  rule  cf  production  from  combinative  causes  applies  to  exis 
tences  or  beings,  and  efficient  and  non-combinative  causes  are  subsi 
diary  to  those  causes.  Therefore  that  which  would  be  the  combinative 
cause  of  combination  would  be  either  another  combination,  or 
that  combination  itself.  It  cannot  be  the  first,  as  it  would  entail  non- 
finality  ;  nor  the  second,  as  it  would  involve  self-dependence,  for  that 
very  combination  cannot  produce  combination  with  itself. 

Objection. — How  does  the  intuition  arise  that  there  is  combination 
of  cloth  in  threads,  and  that  there  is  combination  of  colour  in  cloth  ? 

Answer. — It  is  by  means  of  the  relation  of  their  intrinsic  form,  or 
essential  relation,  as  the  supposition  of  another  combination  would 
entail  non-finality. 

Objection. — The  intuition  of  here,  e.  g.,  "  There  is  colour  here  in  th& 
cloth,"  will,  then,  arise  by  means  of  the  same  essential  relation.  What 
is  the  use  of  combination  ? 

Answer. — It  is  not  so,  since  there  is  no  obstruction  here  to  the 
admission  of  an  additional  relation. 

Objection. — If  it  be  so,  then  "  Here  in  this  place  there  is  non-exis 
tence  of  the  water-pot," — in  this  case  also  there  will  be  either. combina 
tion  or  any  other  relation. 

Answer. — No,  as  the  intuition  can  be  possible  by  means  of  essential 
relation  itself.  For,  on  the  contrary  supposition,  the  absolute  and 
mutual  non-existences  of  the  water-pot,  which  are  eternal  and  combined 
with  more  than  one  substance,  would  have  the  characteristic  of  being 
G-enera,  subsequent  non-existence  also,  being  an  effect  in  combination, 
would  be  perishable  or  destructible,  and  antecedent  non-existence  also, 
not  being  produced,  though  combined,  would  be  indestructible. 


KANlDA  SftTR  AS  VII,  2,  27.  245 


Nor  is  the  quality  of  existence  the  determining  factor  there,  for  the 
quality  of  existence  can  "be  produced  at  any  -time.-.  •  >- 

The  Bhattas  maintain  that  in  non-existence  there  really  is  present 
a  different  relation  called  distinguisheduess  or  qualifiedness.  Nor  is  this 
distinguishedness  be  one  and  the  same  in  the  case  of  all  individual  mani 
festation  of  non-existence,  then  it  would  follow  that  there  is  non-existence 
of  the  water-pot  even  in  that  which  contains  a  water-pot,  inasmuch  as 
the  distinguishedness  of  the  non-existence  of  the  water-pot  would  exist 
by  means  of  the  same  distinguishedness  of  the  non-existence  of  the 
cloth. 

Objection.  —  But  the  water-pot  itself  will  in  this  case  prevent  the 
cognition  of  the  non-existence  of  the  water-pot. 

Answer.  —  It  cannot  do  this,  since  the  non-existence  of  that  which 
will  prevent  such  cognition  is  itself  present  there  by  means  of  the 
relation  of  distinguishedness.  Nor  is  the  very  nature  of  the  substratum 
.(i.e.,  where  the  water-pot  lies)  such  that  on  account  of  it  there  can  be 
no  manifestation  of  the  non-existence  of  water-pot  in  that  place,  for 
immediately  after  the  removal  of  the  water-pot  follows  the  intuition  of 
the  non-existence  of  water-pot  in  that  very  place. 

Objection.  —  In  your  view  also,  why  is  there  not  intuition  of  posses 
sion  of  colour  after  the  destruction  of  colour,  since  Combination  is,  as 
you  say,  eternal  and  one? 

Answer.  —  Because  non-intuition  of  colour  is  proved  from  the  very 
destruction  of  colour. 

The  arguments  against  Combination  have  been  demolished  in  the 
Maytikha  under  Sense-Perception.  So  we  stop  here.  —  26. 

Combination  is  different  from  Substance,  Attribute,  Action, 
Genus,  and  Species. 

Upaskdra.  —  By  way  of  proving  its  difference  from  the  five  beginning  with  Substance  (i.  e., 
Substance,  Attribute,  Action,  Genus,  and  Species),  he  says  : 


||  v9  \  ^ 

:  Dravyatva-gunatva-pratisedhah,  negation  or  exclu 


sion  of  substance-ness  a-nd  attribute-ness,  (in  or  from  Combination). 
Bhavena,  by  existence.  «n^fiT:  Vyakhyatah,  explained. 

27.  The  negation  of  Substance-ness  and  Attribute-ness  (in 
Combination)  is  explained  by  Existence.  —  308. 

'  Bhavah,  means  Existence.  As  Existence  is  not  identical  with 
substance,  etc.,  being  cognised  by  a  different  form  of  understanding,  so 
combination  also  is  different  from  the  same  Substance,  etc.,  i  Dravyatva- 
gunatva  '  is  an  indication  ;  Action-ness,  etc.,  also  should  be  under 
stood.  —  27. 

Combination  is  one. 

Upaskdra.  —  He  proves  Unity  : 


246  VAL§E§IKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


drfHil^H  \\  V9  I  R  I  V:  II 

Tattvam,  that-ness.     One-ness.  Unity.  >n%T  Bhavena,  by  Exis- 


28.  The  Unity  (of  Combination,  is  explained)  by  Existence. 
—309. 

'  Explained  '  is  the  complement.  '  Tattvam,'  i.  e  ,  Unity,'  bhavena,' 
i.  e.,  by  Existence,  is  explained.  As  one  Existence  everywhere  induces 
the  cognition  of  the  existent,  so  one  Combination  everywhere  induces 
the  cognition  of  the  combined.  Moreover  the  inferential  mark  of  Com 
bination  is  not  differentiated,  nor  is  there  any  other  particular  mark. 
For,  we  do  not  find  any  particular  mark,  i.  e.,  differentiating  mark,  of 
Combination,  whereby  we  could  recognise  its  diversity.  For  the  very 
«ame  reason,  Combination  is  eternal  ;  for,  as  in  the  case  of  Existence, 
non-eternality  cannot  appropriately  belong  to  it  which  is  un differen 
tiated  even  in  the  difference  of  Space,  Time,  etc. 

Objection — If  combination  is  nothing  but  this  relation,  then  there 
may  be  disunion  of  threads  and  cloth,  or  of  the  cloth  and  its  colour. 

Answer. — This  cannot  be,  for  in  the  absence  of  (previous)  uncor- 
relsted  existence,  disunion  is  not  possible.  For,  there  is  no  unrelated 
existence  or  colour  and  that  which  possesses  the  colour,  or  of  the  parts 
and  the  whole,  that  there  may  be  a  disunion  between  them. 

Objection. — But  theirl  uncorrelated  existence  may  be  brought  to 
pass. 

Answer. — It  cannot,  for  the  effectuation  is  contravened  by  being 
never  so  experienced. 

The  followers  of  Prabhdkara  hold  that  Combination  is  manifold  and 
also  non-eternal.  But  this  is  not  a  reasonable  view  to  take,  for  the 
intuition  of  "  Colour  is  destroyed,"  whereas  it  is  the  intuition  of  no 
body  that  the  Combination  of  colour  is  destroyed. 

The  view  of  the  school  of  Nyaya  that  Combination  is  perceptible  to 
the  sense  is  also  not  valid.  Combination  is  supersensuous,  for  being 
different  from  the  Soul,  it  is  at  the  same  time  in  a  state  of  being  ui;- 
combined,  like  the  Mind,  or  like  Time,  etc. — 28. 

Bhdsya  : — Combination  is  proved  to  be  an  attribute  in  the  same 
way  as  is  existence,  and  further,  like  existence,  Combination  also  is 
produced  by  itself,  p.  e.,  does  not  depend  upon  any  other  Combiuation 
lor  its  production. 

Here  ends  the  second  chapter  in  the  seventh  book  of  Sankara's 
Commentary  on  the  Vaisesika  Aphorisms. 


KANADA  SflTRAS  VIII,  1,  1.  247 

BOOK  EIGHTH—  CHAPTER  FIRST. 
Cognition  explained  by  allusion  to  III.  i.  2,  18. 

\Jpaskdra.~—  The  order  of  enumeration  was  violated  in  favour  of  the  curiosity  of  the 
disciples.  The  author  now  adopts  the  order  of  enumeration.  Therein  the  examination  of 
understanding  is  the  subject  of  theleighth  book.  Understanding  hat  been  already  mentioned 
for  the  purpose  of  proof  of  the  Soul.  By  recalling  it,  he  says  : 


Dravyesu,  among  substances.  Jirff   Jnanam,  knowledge.    Cogni 
tion.   sqi<p{||HH   Vyakhyatam,  explained. 

1.     Cognition  (has  been)  explained  among  Substance.  —  310. 

By  the  term,  "  Among  substances,"  the  author  implies  the  third 
book,  as  the  the  container  by  the  contained.  The  meaning  is  that 
cognition,  jndnam,  has  been  explained  by  the  two  aphorisms,  namely, 
"  The  universal  experience  of  the  objects  of  the  senses  is  the  mark  of 
(the  existence  of)  an  object  different  from  the  senses  and  their  objects" 
(III.  i.  2),  and  "  That  (i.  e.,  knowledge)  which  is  produced  from  the 
contact  of  the  soul,  the  sense,  and  the  object,  is  other  (than  a  false 
mark)"  (III.  i.  18). 

Now  in  the  kindred  system  (i.  e.,  the    Nydya-Sutram    of    Gautama), 

under  the  defination  of  understanding,  there  has    been  made  a  declara 

tion    of  synonyms,   namely,  "  Understanding,  Apprehension,  Cognition, 

Intuition  —  these  are  synonyms/'  (Nydyd-Sutram,  I.  i.  15),   for    the    pur 

pose  of  demolishing  the  Sankhya  doctrine.     For  the  Sankhyas  maintain 

a  difference  in  meaning  of  the  terms,  Understanding,  etc.  Thus  Prakritif 

Matter,  is  the  state  of  equilibrium    of    Sattva,    Rajas,    and    Tamas,    the 

principles  of  purity,  passion  and  darkness,  or  the  principles  of  illumina 

tion,  evolution,  and    involution,   respectively.     Prakriti  is  one,  and  one 

only,  while  Purusas,  Spirits,  are  divided    to    infinity.   They    are    seated 

in    the    cave    (i.  e.}  retired,    unaffected,    indifferent  spectators),  eternal, 

immutable,    and    characterised,    by    eternal    consciousness.     They    are 

called    lame,  as  it  is    not  their  nature  to  undergo  modification  or  trans 

formation,  while  Prakriti  is  said  to  be  blind,  being  stupid  or    insensate. 

When    there    arises    in   Prakriti  a  desire    for  fhe  enjoyment  of  sensuous 

objects,  or  a  desire  to  see  the  difference  between    Prakriti    and   Pwrusa, 

at  that  moment    Prakriti  is  modified,  or  transforms,  under  the  influence 

or  osculation  of  Purusa.     And  its  first  transformations  Buddhi,    Under 

standing,    a    particular  form    of    the  inner  sense.     Understanding  it  is 

that  is  called  the  principle  of     Mahat,    the    great    one  ;    accordingly  it 

has  been  said,  "  The  great  one  evolves  from  Prakriti."    And  this  under 

standing  is  pure  or  stainless  like  a  mirror.     And  that  particular  trans 

formation    of    it,   which    takes   the    form  of  an  object  in  such  shapes  as 

"  It  is  a  water-pot/'    u  It  is  a  cloth,"  etc.,  through  the    channel    of    the 

external  senses,  is  called  cognition,  jndnam,  and  faculty,  vritti.   Appre 

hension,    upalabdhi,    is    the  same    as  a  kind  of  abhimdna,  egoity  or  self- 

consciousness,  in  the  form  of    "  I  know,"    which    arises  in    consequence 

of  the  non-perception  or  non-apprehension  of   the  distinctness  or  differ 

ence  of  Purusa  which  is  consciousness,  by  cognition  present  in  transpa 

rent  or  pure   understanding.     Pratyaya,    Intuition,    is    that    particular 


248  VAI£E$AIAK  PHILOSOPHY. 


transformation  of  understanding  itself,  which  takes  the  form  of 
pleasure,  pain,  etc.,  through  the  channel  of  the  senses  alone,  in  conse 
quence  of  the  contact  of  garland,  sandalwood,  and  other  objects  of 
sense.  Hence  it  is  that  cognition,  pleasure,  pain,  desire^  aversion,. 
volition,  reminiscence,  virtue,  and  vice  are,  all  of  them,  particular 
transformations  of  understanding,  and  being  present  in  Pralcj'iti  itself, 
in  subtle  forms  or  in  minute  proportions,  appear  and  disappear,  accord 
ing  to  difference  of  circumstances  ;  while  Puritsa  is  as  free  from 
adhesion  or  affinity  or  attachment  as  a  lotus-leaf,  but  casts  its  shadow 
in  the  understanding.  This  theory  which  the  Sankhyas  hold  is  thrown 
away  by  the  proof  indicated  in  the  above  declaration  of  (these  terms  as) 
synonyms.  Thus,  if  the  term,  understanding,  be  derived  in  the  instru 
mental  sense,  viz.,  as  that  by  which  a  thing  is  understood,  then  it  comes 
to  be  nothing  else  than  the  mind.  Nor  is  the  mind  an  object  of  percep 
tion,  whereas  understanding  is  surely  cognizable  by  perception  in  the 
form  of  "  I  understand."  ,  Nor  are  cognition,  etc.,  the  properties  of  the 
internal  sense,  inasmuch  as  they  are  proved  to  exist  only  as  being  the 
properties  of  an  agent.  For  the  manifestation  of  "  I  know,"  "  I  intuit," 
"  I  apprehend,"  takes  place  as  having  community  of  substratum  with 
I-ness  or  egoity.  If  they  reply  that  this  phenomenon  is  abhimdna  or 
conceit,  we  rejoin  that  it  cannot  be  so,  since  there  is  no  obstruction  to 
its  being  real.  It  cannot  be  contended  that  such  obstruction  is  supplied 
by  the  very  characteristic  of  the  Purusa  as  being  seated  in  the  cave, 
that  is  to  say,  by  its  not  being  the  receptacle  of  adventitious  properties 
or  changes  ;  for,  we  would  then  reply  that  eternality  is  compatible 
with  the  nature  of  being  the  substratum  of  adventitious  modes.  For 
that  which  possesses  a  property  and  the  property  are  not  one  and  the 
same  reality,  so  that  the  production  and  destruction  of  the  property 
should  themselves  be  the  production  and  destruction  of  the  substratum 
of  the  property.  It  is  only  he,  then,  who  is  conscious,  that  also  under 
stands,  cognises,  apprehends,  and  intuits.  Hence  the  hypothesis  of 
distinct  entities  (e.  y.,  Soul  and  understanding)  is  not  reasonable.  This- 
is  the  point.  —  1. 

Soul,  Mind,  Ether,  Time,  Space    Air  and  Ultimate  Atoms  are  not 
(ordinarily')  perceptible. 

ITpaskdra.  —  This  cognition,  again,  is  two-fold,  Vidyd,  Science  or  true  knowledge  and 
A.-vidyd,  Nescience  or  false  knowledge.  Vidyd  is  of  four  kinds,  characterised  by  perception, 
inference,  memory  and  testimony.  A-  Vidyd  also  has  four  kinds  characterised  by  doubt,. 
error  or  mistake,  dream,  and  uncertainty  or  indecision  or  non-finality.  Among  the  above 
four  kinds  of  true  knowledge,  that  which  is  inferential,  is  not  produced  by  the  senses.  Why 
this  is  so,  is  explained  here. 


u  c  i  \  \  *  \\ 

<f3T     Tatra,     therein,     among    substances.     Sff?*n     Atma,    soul,     q^s 

Manas,  mind.  ^  Cha,  and  others,  e.  y.,  Ether,  Time,  Space,  Air  and 
Ultimate  Atoms.  W&rt  A-pratyakse,  non-perceptible,  not  objects  of 
perception. 

2.     Among  Substances,  the  Soul,  the  Mind  and   other  ara  not 
objects  of  perception.  —  311. 


KANiDA  StiTRAS  VII,  1,  2.  249 


The  word,  soul,  in  the  aphorism  denotes  the  soul  of  another  or  one's 
own  soul.  That  even  one's  own  soul  is  not  an  object  of  perception,  has 
been  already  declared,  inasmuch  as  the  casual  mental  intuition  of  the 
I,  aham,  in  one's  own  soul,  is  repudiated  by  such  intuitions  "  I  am 
fair,"  "  I  am  thin/'  "  I  have  long  arms,  etc.  (where  the  I  has  reference 
to  the  body).  The  word,  "cha,"  extends  the  application  of  the  predicate 
to  the  substances,  namely,  ether,  time,  space,  air,  and  ultimate  atoms. 
Sense-born  cognition  again  is  of  two  degrees,  being  that  of  the 
omniscient  and  that  of  the  non-omniscient.  That  of  the  omniscient  is  the 
cognition  of  such  and  such  complements  of  objects  by  means  of  the 
proximity  or  presentation  (or  reaching  upto  ordinarily  supersensuous 
objects)  characterised  by  virtue  or  merit  springing  from  Yoga  (i.  e.t 
inhibition  of  the  activity  of  the  internal  organ,  the  mind,  and  con 
sequent  freedom  of  the  all-pervading  soul,  in  other  words,  the  steadi 
ness  of  the  mind  in  the  soul.  Vide  v.  ii.  16  above-*)  Thus  ultimate 
atoms  fall  within  its  sphere,  (or  are  objects  of  perception),  being  de 
monstrable,  nameable,  and  existent. 

Objection. — Since  there  is  no  material  or  data  of  such  cognition, 
how  can  this  be  the  case  ?  Magnitude  also  is  a  cause  of  sense-percep 
tion,  but  ultimate  atoms  do  not  possess  magnitude.  The  possession  of 
colour,  again  is  the  cause  of  visual  perception,  but  sapce,  etc.,  do 
not  possess  colour.  How  then  can  there  be  perception  in  these 
oases  ? 

Answer. — The  objection  does  not  stand,  for  such  omniscience  is 
possible  by  means  of  the  mind  alone  as  an  auxiliary  to  the  virtue  or 
merit  born  of  Yoga,  or  by  means  of  the  eye  and  other  senses  under  the 
favourable  influence  of  such  mind.  For  the  virtue  or  merit  produced 
by  Yoga  is  of  inconceivable  efficacy,  and  does  not  stand  in  need  of  any 
other  auxiliary. 

"  The  man  whose  omniscience  is  the  subject  of  controversy,  is 
not  omniscient,  because  he  is  a  man  like  myself," — such  reasonings, 
however,  are  inapplicable,  since  they  are  void  of  argument  which  would 
render  impossible  the  proposition  of  the  other  side  (maintaining  the 
existence  of  omniscience  in  the  man  in  question),  as  is  the  case  with 
the  reasoning,  "  A  follower  of  Prabhdkara  (a  writer  of  the  Mimamsa 
school)  is  not  versed  in  Mirnamsa,  because  he  is  a  man  like  myself." 

Perception  of  the  non-omnisciont,  again,  is  two-fold,  discrimina 
tive  and  non-discriminative-  Discriminative  cognition,  according  to 
Dharmakirti  and  Dinndya  and  others  of  the  Bauddha  school,  is  not 
certain  knowledge  or  proof.  Thus  they  argue  :  Such  cognition  owes 
its  manifestation  or  apparent  reality  to  connection  with  words.  But 
the  connection  of  an  object  with  a  word,  a  name,  is  not  possible,  that 
there  should  be  such  intuition,  coloured  with  a  name,  as  it  were,  as 
"  A  water-pot,"  or  "  A  piece  of  cloth."  Nor  is  jati,  the  universal, 
really  existent  or  objectively  real,  that  the  being  distinguished  with 
the  possession  of  it  should  be  apprehended  in  objects  by  the  sense.  Nor 
is  possible  connection  of  the  existent  characterised  by  itself  with  that 
which  is  non-existent.  Nor  is  the  non-existent  within  the  cognizance 
of  senses.  Therefore,  discrimination  (alochanam)  is  produced  by  the 
senses,  and  while  in  the  process  of  being  produced,  and  leading  to 


250  VAI&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

corresponding  objects,  by  the  power  of  the  discrimination,  discrimina 
tive  cognition  is  called  perception  and  also  proof.  (To  this  the  com 
mentator  gives  the  reply.)  Now,  while  discriminative  cognition  may 
be  objectively  unreal,  besause  it  owes  its  manifestation  or  apparent 
reality  to  connection  with  words,  it  may  be  at  the  same  time  real, 
because  it  is  the  product  of  contact  of  sense  and  object.  Hence 
it  is  doubtful  that  discriminative  cognition  is  unreal.  Moreover,  the 
being  distinguished  with  the  possession  of  a  name  may  very  well  be  a 
possible  object  in  visual  cognition,  its  appearance  in  consciousness 
being  possible  form  presentation  by  memory,  as  is  the  case  with  the 
perception  "  Fragrant  sandalwood."  Or,  it  may  be,  the  being  distin 
guished  with  the  possession  of  a  name  does  not  come  to  light  in  perceptual 
cognition,  and  there  is  only  recollection  of  the  name,  which  as  soon  as 
it  is  recollected  serves  to.  distinguish  its  corresponding  object,  like  the 
recollection  of  the  counter-opposite  in  the  case  of  the  cognition  of  non- 
existence.  Also  it  has  been  proved  that  jAti,  the  universal  or  class, 
ect.,  are  immanent  in  objects  or"  entities,  Hence,  discriminative  or 
modified  cognition  also  is  perception,  inasmuch  as  it  is  produced  from 
contact  of  senses  and  objects. 

Objection.  —  Non-discriminative,  or  unmodified,  cognition  neither 
excites  to  activity,  nor  is  an  object  of  current  use.  What  then  is  the 
proof  of  its  existence  ? 

Answer.  —  The  proof  is  discriminative,  or  modified,  cognition  itself  ,. 
for,  this  is  a  specialized  cognition,  or  the  cognition  of  a  thing  as  pos 
sessing,  and  being  accordingly  distinguished  by,  something  else.  Nor 
can  it  be  produced  without  the  cognition  of  that  which  is  possessed  and 
serves  to  distinguish  or  individualize,  that  is  the  distinctive  element. 
For  it  has  been  ascertained  above  that  the  cause  of  specialized  cogni 
tion  is  cognition  of  that  which  serves  to  specialize,  contact  of  sense 
and  that  which  is  going  to  be  specialized,  and  non-apprehension  of 
non-connection  of  both.  —  2. 

Bhdsya:  Among  substances,  Self,  Mind,  and  Ether  are  not  objects 
of  perception. 

Cognition,  how  produced. 

Upaiskdra.—lu  order  to  elucidate  how  Coguition  is   produced,  in  what  circumstances,  and 
from  what  causes,  he  says  : 


Jnana-nirddese,  in  the  differentiation  of  a  particular  cog 
nition.  5TFff^Gqfflf%fa:  Jnana-nispatti-vidhih,  mode  or  process  of  produc 
tion  of  cognition.  TTF:  Uktah,  stated,  described. 

3.  The  mode  of  the  production  of  Cognition  is  being  descri 
bed,  in  connection  with  the  differentiation  of  a  particular  Cognition. 
—312. 

A  cognition  should  be  marked  off  or  distinguished  from  other 
cognitions,  in  i-espeet  of  the  mode  of  its  production,  in  respect  of  its 
subject  matter,  and  in  respect  of  its  property.  Now,  differentiation  of 


KANADA  SfiTRAS  VIII,  1,  4.  251 

cognition  having  .to  be  made,  the  process  of  the  production  of  cognition 
ia  going  to  be  described.  This  is  the  meaning.  In  '  uktah,'  the  past 
participle  affix  Ha  is  used  in  the  sense  of  incipient  action.  —  3. 

Vivriti.  —  What  is  the  cause  of  cognition  ?  There  being  this  expect 
ancy,  he  says  : 

'  Jnana-nirddese/  i.  e.,  in  the  third  |book,  where  enunciation  of 
•cognition  has  been  made.  There  too  the  process  of  the  production  of 
cognition  has  been  described.  The  meaning  is  that  the  causes  of  cogni 
tion  have  been  mentioned  in.  the  aphorism,  "  That  (i.e.,  knowledge> 
which  is  produced  from  the  contact  of  the  soul,  the  sense  and  the  objec. 
is  other  (than  a  false  mark)  "  (III  •  i.  18.)  Thus,  the  soul  is  the  combi 
native  cause  of  cognition,  conjunction  of  the  soul  and  the  mind  is  the 
non-combinative  cause,  and  contact  or  contiguity  of  the  object  is  the 
efficient  cause-  This  has  been  mentioned  in  that  very  aphorism.  It 
should  be  observed  that  the  causality  of  contact  has  been  stated  under 
the  topic  of  perception. 

Substance  is  the  cause  of  cognition  of  Attributes  and  Actions. 
.—  He  describes  the  mode  of  production  (of  cognition)   : 

11  ^  i  ?  i  3  n 


Gruna-karmmasu,  Attributes  and  Actions.  ^TRT^55  Sannikris- 
tesu,  being  in  contact.  jjTFTf^iVt:  JMna-nispattehyo'f  the  production  of 
cognition,  ^wf,  dravyam,  substance.  ^TTW*  Karanam,  cause. 


4.      Substance   is    the    cause   of    the    production  of  cognition, 
.where  Attributes  and  Actions  are  in  contact  (with|the  senses).  —  313. 

Substance  is  the  cause  of  the  cognition  which  is  produced  in  respect 
of  attributes,  e.  g.,  colour,  etc.,  and  in  respect  of  actions,  e.  g.}  throwing 
upwards,  etc.,  Both  of  them  are  apprehended  only  in  so  far  as  they 
inhere  in  substances  appropriate  or  perceptible  to  the  senses.  Hence 
it  is  the  appropriateness  or  perceptibility  of  the  substances  which  deter 
mines  their  perceptibility.  It  is  by  substance,  moreover,  that  their 
co'itiict  with  the  senses  is  constituted,  they  being  apprehended  by  means 
of  their  combination  with  the  conjunct  (i.  e.,  Substance  which  is  con 
junct'  with  the  sense).  Althogh  there  is  apprehended  the  odour  of  dis 
persed  particles  of  champaka  flower,  and  of  portions  of  camphor,  which 
aio  all  imperceptible,  yet  it  is  substance,  imperceptible  though  it  be,. 
which  effects  their  contacts.  Although  perceptibility  of  substance  ia 
not  a  requisite  in  the  apprehension  of  sound,  yet  sound  is  apprehneded 
Only  as  it  is  combined  or  inherent,  therein  and  hence  this  itself  is  the 
requisite.  If  it  be  asked,  why  is  made  this  supposition  of  contact  which 
is  invisible  ?  we  reply  that  the  production  of  cognition,  being 
an  effect,  necessitates  the  supposition  of  a  cause.  This  is  the  import.  —  4. 

Substance  is  the  cause  of  cognition  of  Genus  and  Species  also. 
UpaaJcdra.—He  describes  another  mode  of  the  production  of  knowledge  : 


'252  VAI^ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


n  s  i  ?  i 


%*iJ<|  Sainanya-vifiesesu,  in  genera  and  species. 
Samanya-visesa-abhavat,  in  consequence  of  the  non-existence  of  genus 
and  species,  *T<T:  Tatah,  thence,  from  aubstrata.  ^  Eva,  alone.  STT^J? 
Jnanam,  cognition. 

5.     In  consequence  oflthe  non-existence  of  Genus  and  Species 
in  genera  and  species,  cognition  (of  them)  is  due  to  that  alone.  —  314. 

Existence  is  the  (summum)  genus,  its  species  are  substanceness,. 
attribute-ness  and  action-ness.  These  again  are  genera,  and  their 
species  are  earth-ness,  etc.,  colour-ness,  etc.,  throwing-upward-ness, 
etc.  Among  these,  omnisensuous  cognition  of  the  genera  inhering  in 
substance  is  due  to  that  only,  that  is,  due  only  to  appropriate  or  per 
ceptible,  particular  substratum,  and  also  to  combination  with  the* 
conjunct,  combination  with  the  combined  with  the  conjunct,  .and  com 
bination  with  the  combined,  all  these  combinations  being  related  to 
that  substratum.  Omnisensuous  cognition,  again,  is  produced,  in  the 
case  of  attribute,  from  combination  with  the  combined  with  the 
Conjunct;  in  the  case  of  sound-ness,  fca-noss,  etc.,  from  combination  with 
the  combined  ;  in  the  case  of  existence,  from  combination  w'th  the 
conjunct,  from  combination  with  the  combined  with  the  conjunct,  and 
from  combination  with  the  combined.  In  the  case  of  attribute,  the 
proximity  or  contiguity  which  is  the  condition  of  perceptibility,  is  not 
Constituted  by  combination  with  the  conjunct,  or  combination. 

It  may  be  objected  :  '  Tatah,  eva/  i.  e.,  from  contact  with  or 
contiguity  to  their  substrata  alone  —  auch  delimitation  or  exclusion  is 
not  valid.  Because  in  genus  and  in  species  also  there  do  exist  other 
genus  and  species.  Contact  with,  or  contiguity  to,  them  also  is  a  cause 
of  cognition.  In  anticipation  of  this  objection,  he  says,  *  In  consequence 
of  the  non-existence  of  genus  and  species.'  For  genus  and  species  do 
not  exist  in  genus  and  species,  since  that  would  entail  infinite  regres 
sion.  The  intuition  of  their  mutual  distinctions  arises  from  their  own 
forms  or  natures  alone,  or  in  this  way,  for  instance,  that  the  genus, 
bovine-ness,  is  cognised  from  the  distinctness  of  the  upddhi,  adjunct  or 
external  condition,  characterised  by  being  present-in-all-bovine  ai  i- 
inials  ;  while  being  absent  from  other  than  bovine  animials.  Similarly 
with  regard  to  pot-ness,  etc.,  also.  —  5. 


•iol«nt*«  and  Species  are  causes  of  cognition  of  Substance,  Attribute 

°  and  Action. 

*TI*_ 

Upaskdru.  —  It  may  be  asked  :  As,  in  consequence  of  the  non-existence  of  genus  and 
epeoies,  cognition  of  genus  and,  species  is  absolutely  independent  of  them,  is  it  'likewise 
absolutely  independent  of  them  in  (the  case  of  substance,  attribute  and  action  also  ?  He 
says,  No  : 


n  *  i  n  5  ir 


CANADA  SftTRAS  VIII,  1,  8.  253 

Samanya-visesa-apeksam,  dependent  upon  genus  and 
species  ^s^n^wfg  Dravya-guna-karmmnasu,  in  respect  of  substance, 
attribute  and  action. 

6.  (Cognition  which  is  produced)  in  respect  of  Substance, 
Attributes  and  Action,  (is)  dependent  upon  genus  and  species. 
—315. 

"  Cognition  is  produced  "  —  'this  is  the  subject  in  discourse.  In 
respect  of  substance,  attribute  and  action,  ithere  is  no  doubt  cognition 
•specialized  with  the  content  of  substance-ness,  attribute-ness  and 
action-ness.  Such  specialized  cognition,  again,  cannot  be  produced 
without  the  contact  of  the  subject  specified,  that  which  serves  to 
specify,  a-.ctthe  sense.  Hence  dependence  upon  genus  and  species  is 
there  necessary.  For  there  is  such  specialized  cognition  as  "  This  is 
substance,"  "  This  is  attribute,"  "  This  is  action."  This  is  the 
import.  —  6- 

Substance,  Attiribute  and  Action  are  causes  of  cognition  of  Substance. 

[fpaskdra.—Ia,  then,  in  the  case  of  substance  also,  cognition    dependent   only  upon  genus 
and  species  ?     To  remove  this  curiosity,  he  says  : 

II  c  I  ?  l  vs  ii 


^5^   Dravye    ,in    substance.  ^s^JT^T^^I^n?         Dravya-guna-karmraft- 
apeksam,  dependent  upon  substance,  attribute  and  action. 

7.     (Cognition),  in  the  case  of  Substance,  (is)  dependent   upon 
Substance,  Attribute  and  Action.  —  316. 

"  Cognition  is  produced"  —  this  is  the  subject  in  discourse.  "  A 
white  cow,  possessing  a  bell,  is  going,"  —  .this  is  a  cognition.  Here  subs 
tance,  the  bell,  is  the  distinction  or  that  which  serves  to  specify  ;  'white' 
denotes  an  attribute  ;  '  is  going  '  denotes  action.  Thus  in  specialized 
cognition  or  intuition  of  a  thing  distinguished  with  the  possession  of 
something  else,  there  cannot  be  non-apprehension  of  the  distinction  or 
that  which  serves  to  specify,  nor  can  such  specialized  intuition  take 
place  without  relation  to  that  which  serves  to  specify.  Hence  in  the 
cognition  of  substance  there  is  dependence  upon  substance,  attribute 
and  action.  Such  is  the  import.  —  7. 

Attribute  and  Action  are  not   causes  of  cognition  of  Attribute 

and  Action. 

Upaskdra.  —  Is   there,   then,   dependence    upon   attribute    and    action,  also  in  the  case  of 
attribute  and  action  ?     He  saj's,  No  : 

U  c  m  c  II 


Guna-karmmasu,  attributes    and  actions.    n^TW^faraT^  Gruna- 
karuuna-abhavat,  in  consequence  of  the  non-existence  of    attribute    and 
action.  JpJHJ^ft^t  Gruna-karinnia-apeksam,  dependent  upon  attribute  and 
ctioa  .  f  Na,  not.  f%€T^  Vidyate,  exists. 


254  VAT^ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

8.  (Cognition),  dependent  upon  Attribute  and  Action,  does- 
not  exist  in  the  case  of  Attributes  and  Actions,  inasmuch  as  Attri 
bute  and  Action  do  not  exist  in  Attribute  and  Action.  —  317. 

"  Cognition  "  is  the  complement  of  the  aphorism.  Since  there  is 
no  cognition  of  attribute  as  distinguished  with  the  possession  of  an 
other  attribute,  and  since  there  is  no  cognition  of  action  as  dis 
tinguished  with  the  possession  of  another  action,  there  is  no  cognition 
thereof,  which  is  dependent  upon  attribute  and  action.  For  there 
exists  no  attribute  in  an  attribute  nor  action  in  actions,  whereby  .they 
might  appear  as  distinctions  in  them.  This  is  the  import.  —  8. 

Combination  (as  well  as  Attribute^  is  a  e<  use  of  Cognition. 

Upaskdra.—  Lest  it  might  be  asked  that  since  thore  is  manifestation  of  attribute  and 
action  (in  the  cognitions  thereof),  why  there  should  not  be  dependence  upon  attribute  and 
action  in  the  cognition  of  attribute  and  in  tho  cognition  of  action,  BO  ho  begins  another 
topic  in  reply  to  that  : 


ii  *  i  n  s.  u 

Samavayinah,  of  that  in  which  combination  exists,  the 
substratum,  "tfaqr^ovaityat,  from  whiteness.  >%q§^:  Svaitya-buddhehr 
from  cognition  of  whiteness.  =g  Cha,  and.  £ft  Sveto,  in  a  white  object. 
gfe;:  Buddhih,  cognition,  ^  Te,  they.  ^  Ete,  those.  ^T5^^^  Karyya- 
karana-bhute,  related  as  effect  and  cause. 

9.  The  cognition,  ('  It  is  white  ')  in  respect  of  a  white  object, 
(results)  from  whiteness  of  the  substance  in  which  combination  of 
whiteness  exists,  and  from  the  cognition  of  whiteness.  These  two, 
(cognition  of  white  object,  and  cognition  of  whiteness),  are  related 
as  effect  and  cause.  —  318. 

By  using  the  term  'Samavayinah'  he  states  the  causality  of  relation. 
Thus,  inasmuch  as  combination  of  attribute  does  not  exist  in  attribute, 
and  inasmuch  as  combination  of  action  does  not  exist  in  action,  in 
their  respective  cognitions  there  is  no  dependence  upon  attribute  and 
action  as  distinguishing  marks  or  qualifications  ;  but  there  does  exist 
dependence  upon  attribute  and  action  as  subject-matter  or  objects  of 
cognition.  This  being  so,  it  is  stated  that  in  the  case  of  such  intuitions 
as  "  A  white  conch  shell/'  the  combination  of  whiteness,  the  attribute 
whiteness,  and  the  cognition  of  whiteness  as  a  distinction  or  that  which 
serves  to  specify,  are  the  causes.  So  that  relation  with  the  distinction  r 
the  distinction,  'and  cognition  of  them  are  the  causes  of  specialized 
perceptual  cognition.  Hereby  is  proved  all  that  has  been  stated. 
before.  —  9. 

Bhasya.  —  reads  VIII.  i.  9  as  two  aphorisms,  viz.,  Samavdyinah 
Svaitydchchhaiiya  buddhescha  svete  buddhih,  and  Ta  ete  kdryakdrana- 
bhtite. 


KANiDA  SftTRAS  VIII,  1,  11.  255 

Exception  to  the  above.     In  the  case  of   Substances,  Cognition  is  not 

a  cause   of  cognition. 

Upaskdra.  —  It  may  be  objected.  As  in  the  case  of  "  possessing  a  bell,"  cognition  of 
substance  (e.  g.t  the  cow  possessing  the  bell)  is  dependent  upon  substance  (e.  g.,  the  bell),  so 
also  in  the  case  of  (the  serial  cognitions  of)  "  It  is  a  pillar,"  It  is  a  jar,"  etc.,  where  the 
the  cognition  does  not  embrace  another  substance  as  a  distinction,  cognition  of  (the  first) 
substance,  (the  pillar),  is  the  cause  (of  the  cognition  of  the  second  substance,  jar), 
(and  so  or).  Thus  nowhere  can  there  be  cognition  of  substance  in  the  first  instance 
or  at  first  hand. 


Dravyesu,  in  substances.  %(P)d\d<^KU(|:  An-itara-itara-kai  anali, 
11  ot  causes,  one  of  another. 

10.     In  the  case  of  Substances,  (cognitions  are)  not   causes   of 
one  another.  —  319. 

Accoodingly  he  says  . 

"  Cognitions  "  is  the  complement  of  the  aphorism.  Cognition  of 
the  jar,  even  though  it  takes  place  immediately  after  the  cognition  of 
the  pillar,  is  yet  not  the  effect  of  the  cognition  of  the  pillar,  inasmuch 
as  the  pillar  cannot  properly  be  the  distinction  of,  or  that  which  serves 
to  specify,  by  being  containedlin,  the  jar.  —  10. 

The  exception  explained. 

Upaskdra.  —  It  may  be  urged  that  the  sequence  of  the  cognitions  of  the  water-pot,  the 
cloth,  etc.,  is  observed,  and  that  that  sequence  is  due  only  to  the  relation  of  effect  and 
•cause.  So  he  says  : 


Karana-ayaugapadyat,  ifrom  non-simultaneity  of 
causes-  ^TKm**ll<^  Karana-Kramat,  from  succession  of  causes.  ^  Cha, 
and-  ^rerf^^l'ri  Ghata-pata-adi-buddhinam  of  the  cognitions  of  the 
water-pot,  the  cloth,  etc.  3W  Kratnah,  succession.  ^  Na,  not. 


Hetu-phala-bhavat,  in  consequence  of  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect. 

11.  The  sequence  of  the  cognition  of  the  water-pot,  the  cloth, 
etc.,  (results)  from  the  sequence  of  their  causes,  due  to  the  non- 
simultaneity  of  the  causes,  and  not  in  consequence  of  the  relation 
of  cause  and  effect  (amongs  the  cognitions.)  —  320. 

The  sequence  of  the  cognitions  of  the  water-pot,  the  cloth,  etc.,  is 
dependent  upon  the  sequence  of  their  causes,  and  not  dependent  upon 
the  relation  of  cause  and  effect.  If  it  be  asked,  where  the  sequence  of 
causes  itself  comes  from,  so  he  says,  '  from  the  non-simultaneity  of  the 
causes.'  Simultaneity  of  cognitions  has  been  denied  or  disproved. 
Hence  there  is  not  simultaneity  also  of  diverse  causes  of  cognition,  If, 


256  VAI&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


on  the  other  hand,  there  were  simultaneity  of  causes,  it  would  entail 
simultaneity  also  of  effect,  and  thus  the  argument  that  non-production 
of  simultaneous  cognitions  is  the  mark  of  the  existence  of  the  mind, 
would  be  shattered.  This  is  the  import. — 11. 

Here  ends  the  first  chapter  of  the  eighth  book  in  the  Commentary 
of  Sankara  upon  the  Vaisesika  Aphorisms. 

Vivriti. — The  sequence  or  order,  in  the  form  of  antecedence  and 
subsequence,  of  the  cognitions  of  the  water-pot,  cloth,  etc.,  arises,  not 
from  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect  amongst  them,  but  from  the  orderr 
or  the  antecedence  and  subsequence,  of  the  contacts,  etc.,  of  the  water- 
pot,  cloth,  etc.,  (with  the  senses),  which  contacts  are  the  causes  of  those 
cognitions.  The  word  '  cha,'  and,  implies  the  addition  of  non-simul 
taneity  which  is  not  mentioned  here,  and  this  word  is  to  be  construed 
after  the  word  sequence  or  order.  The  mean.ing,  therefore,  is  this  that 
the  non-simultaneity  of  the  cognitions  of  the  water-pot,  cloth,  etc.,  is> 
due  to  the  non-simultaneity  of  their  causes,  e.  g.,  contacts  with  senses,, 
etc.  Where,  however,  simultaneity  of  the  contacts,  etc.,  of  the  water-pot 
and  the  cloth  exists,  there  is  simultaneously  produced'a  collective  cogni 
tion  of  all  the  objects  in  contact  with  the  senses  for  the  time  being. 
Hence  it  is  also  to  be  understood  that  simultaneity  of  effects  follows. 
from  simultaneity  of  causes, .  and  non-sequence  of  effects  from  non- 
sequence  of  causes. 

Understanding  or  Intelligence,  buddhi,  is  primarily  divided  into 
presentation,  anubhtiti,  and  representation,  smTiti.  Presentation, 
according  to  the  doctrine  of  Kanada,  is  again  two-fold,  being  divided 
into  perception  pratyaksa  and  inference,  anumdna.  Perception  is  of 
six  kinds,  as  derived  from  smelling,  etc.,  (t.  a-,  from  the  five  external, 
and  the  internal,  senses)  ;  and  is  two-fold,  as  discirminative,  saviTeal- 
paka,  and  non-discriminative,  mrvikalpaka  ;  and  two-fold,  as  ordinary 
or  popular,  laukika,  and  super-ordinary  or  hyper-popular,  alauTciJca. 
Inference,  again,  is  three-fold,  as  produced  by  illation  from  only  positive 
conditions,  kevala-anvayi,  or  purely  agreemental  ;  from  only  negative- 
conditions  kevala-vyatireki  or  differential ;  and  from  both  positive  and 
negative  conditions  Sdmdnyato-drista,  or  inference  from  commonly 
observed  marks.  For  example,  "  This  is  expressible  by  words,  inas 
much  as  it  is  knowable,"  etc.,  are  illations  from  purely  positive  condi 
tion  (or  by  Mill's  method  of  agreement).  "  Earth  differs  from  other 
substances,  inasmuch  as  it  is  possessed  of  odour,"  and  the  like  are  illa 
tions  from  purely  negative  conditions,  (or  by  Mill's  method  of  differ 
ence)  ;  and  "  The  mountain  is  fiery,  inasmuch  as  it  smokes,"  and  the- 
like  are  illations  from  both  positive  and  negative  conditions  (or  by 
Mill's  method  of  agreement  and  difference.)  Representation,  reproduc 
tion  or  memory,  on  the  other  hand,  is  uniform,  dependent  on  that  form 
of  Samshdra  which  is  called  Hhdvand  or  permanent  mental  impression,, 
having  the  same  form  as  the  original  presentation  and  dependent  upon 
certain  cognition  in  which  inattention  played  no  part.  In  another 
point  of  view  also,  understanding  is  two-fold,  science  or  correct  know 
ledge,  pramd,  and  nescience  or  incorrect  knowledge,  apramd.  Science- 
is  cognition  '  a  certain  form  of  that  which  has  that  form.  Nescience 
is  cognition  in  certain  form  of  that  in  which  there  is  non-existence- 


KANADA  SfiTRAS  VIII,  1,  11.  257 

of  that  form.  Understanding  or  Intelligence  is  also  two-fold  accord 
ingly  as  it  is  divided  into  doubt,  sam^aya,  and  certitude,  niSchaya. 
Doubt  is  a  cognition  whereof  the  form  is  (mutually)  repugnant  exis 
tence  and  non-existence  in  one  and  the  same  object;  certitude  in  regard 
to  a  thing  is  cognition  in  the  form  thereof,  and  not  in  the  form  of  the 
non-existence  thereof.  In  this  doctrine,  in  the  case  of  cognition  of 
similarity,  and  in  that  of  knowledge  of  terms,  an  inference  takes  place 
by  the  production  of  a  judgment  respecting  the  inferential  mark, 
subsequently  thereto.  Evidence  or  proof,  pramdnay  is  of  two  kinds, 
perception  and  inference  ;  and  science  is  exact  experience  or  correct 
presentation  or  presentation  in  accordance  with  reality.  Tnis  will  be 
explained  by  the  author  of  the  aphorisms  himself  in  the  sequel. 


258  VAlSESTKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


BOOK  EIGHTH—  CHAPTER  SECOND. 

Cognition   of  a  doubly  specialized  nature,  illustrated. 

Upaskdra.  —  Having  described  the  mode  of  production  of  percoptual  cognition,  both 
<hscriminative  and  non-discriminative,  now  the  author,  with  a  view  to  describe  the  per 
ception  of  (a  doubly  specialized  nature,  or)  the  being  specialized  in  the  specialized,  gives  a 
few  examples: 


I  e:  |  ^  |  \  \\ 

Ayam  this,  ^r:  Esah  that.  ?*W\  Tvayii,  by  you.  $rf  Kritam, 
done.  tfpTq  Bhojaya,  feed  y*H  En  am,  him.  ffr  Iti,  such.  f^«n^  Buddh'i- 
apeksam,  dependent  uponunderstauding  or  cognition. 

1.        This,'  '  That,'  '  Done  by    you,'  '  Feed    him'—  such  (cogni 
tions  are)  dependent  upon  Understanding.  —  321. 

The  cognition,  'this,'  arises  in  respect  of  an  object  which  is  near 
and,  'that/  in  respect  of  an  object  which  is  dista.it.  'By  you'  _  such 
cognition,  coloured  with  the  characteristic  of  being  an  agent,  presup 
poses  or  depends  upon  the  cognition  that  he  is  independent  in  the 
action.  The  cognition  of  the  act,  namely,  'done,'  de:  ends  upon  the 
cognition  that  it  is  the  subject  of  the  operation  of  the  instrument  of 
act!  n.  The  cognition,  'feed/  depends  upon  the  cognition  that  he  in 
the  agent  in  the  act  of  feeding,  and  also  the  employer  of  the  instru 
ment.  The  cognition,  'him,'  depends  upon  the  cognition  that  he  is  the 
subject  of  the  operation  or  relation  of  the  fed  and  the  feeder.  Similar 
other  instances  of  cognition,  dependent  upon  cognition,  should  be 
understood.  — 

Dependence  of  cognition  upon  cognition,  explained. 

Upaskdra.—  He  says  that  this  (i.e.,  dependence  of  cognition  upon  cognition  in  some  o- 
is  proved  by  induction  from  agreement  and  difference: 

d*f  *TRRseiGwraR[  ii  *  i  *  i  R  n 

?tw    Dristesu,    in    the  case  of  objects  seen.     «rRT^  Bhavat,  from  their 
existence  or  appearance.  SK|<|  A-dristesu,  in  the  case  of  objects  ui-.seen. 
Abhavat,  from  their  non-existence  or  non-appearance. 


2.  (Such  cognitions  depend  upon  previous  other  cognitions), 
inasmuch  as  they  appear  in  respect  of  objects  seen,  and  do  not 
appear  in  respect  of  objects  unseen.  —  322. 

When  the  contiguous  object  of  the  cognition  'This;'  the  object, 
though  distant  yet  presented  in  consciousness,  of  the  cognition  'That,' 
the  object,  i-e.,  the  contiguous  agent,  of  the  cognition  'By  you/  the 
object,  i.  e.,  the  action,  of  the  cognition  'done/  the  object,  i.e.",  the  em 
ployer  and  the  employed,  of  the  cognition  'Feed/  the  object,  i.e.,  the 
occupation  of  both  of  them,  of  the  cognition  'Him/  —  when  these  objects 
come  into  contact  with  the  senses,  then  such  cognition  is  produced. 
Whereas  with  reference  to  unseen  objects  these  cognitions  do  not 


KANADA  StiTRAS  VIII,  2,  5.  259 

appear.  Hence  this  (i.e-,  the  dependence  of  cognition  upon  cognition 
can  be  inferred  from  agreement  av.d  difference.  This  is  the  mean 
ing.—  2. 

Substance,  Attribute  and  Action  are  called  artka  or  object. 

\3pankara.  —  Ho  now  begins  another  topio  : 

II  c:  I  R  I  %  II 


H*:  Arthah  object.  *fr  Iti,  such.  jfw^Wg  Dravya-guua-karm- 
masu,  in  respect  of  substance,  attribute,  and  action. 

3.     (The    Vaisesikas   apply)   the  term,  object,   to  Substance, 
Attribute  and  Action.  —  323 

Of  these,  i.  &-,  Substance,  Attribute  and  Action,  the  characteristic 
of  being  sought  after  or  apprehended  (by  the  senses)  or  objectified  in 
such  and  such  ways,  has  been  stated.  Hence,  '(It  is)  an  object/—  such 
is  the  terminology  of  the  Vaisesika  thinkers  with  regard  to  'hem,  inas 
much  as  as  they  are  presented  by  the  term,  object.  Accordingly  it  has 
been  said  by  Professor  Praaastadeva,  "The  characteristic  of  being 
denoted  by  the  term,  object,  belongs  to  the  three.  "- 

IV-  ii.  2,  re-called. 
Upaskdra.  —  He  introduces  another  topic. 

H  *  i  *  i  *  ii 


,  Dravyesu,  under  substances.  *|gnw«!7?^.  PaScha-atmakatvam, 
t.euta-subsfcantiality,  the  characteristic  of  being  a  compound  of  five 
-substances.  stfM^H  Pratisiddham,  denied,  contravened. 

4.  In  (the  topic  dealing  with  the  ascertainment  of)  Substances, 
(the  theory)  that  bodies,  etc.,  are  a  compound  of  five  elements,  has 
been  refuted.  —  -324. 

'Under  substances'  —  the  term  indicates  the  topic  of  the  determina 
tion  <>f  the  predicable,  substance.  By  the  aphorism  (IV.  ii.  2,  supra*)", 
"Of  things  perceptible  and  imperceptible,  etc.,"  the  penta-substantiality 
of  the  body,  etc.,  that  is  to  say,  (the  theory,  that  they  are  compounds 
of  five  elements,  ;pratisiddham,'  has  been  refuted.  As  a  variety  of 
constituent  causes  does  not  belong  to  the  body,  so  also  it  does  not  belong 
to  the  senses  of  smell,  etc.,  which  are  going  to  be  described,  It,  there 
fore,  becomes  proved  that  the  senses  are  uniformly  percipient  of  their 
corresponding  attributes.  This  is  the  import.  —  4. 

The  Sense  of  Smell  is  constituted  by  the  element  of  Earth. 
a.—yie  states  the  proposition  for  which  the  topic  was  begun  : 

II  5  I  R  I  V,  II 


260  VAI^ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


Bhuyastvat,  by  reason  of  preponderance  or  predominance. 
Gandha-vatvat,  by  reason  of  possession  of  smell.  ^  Cha,  and. 
Prithivi;  earth.  7TOITFT  G-andha-jnane,  in  (the  constitution  of)  that 
by  which  smell  is  perceived,  i.  e.,  the  olfactory  sense,  gfift:  Prakritih, 
matter,  material  cause,  essence. 

5.     By  reason    of    (its)    predominance,   and   of   possession  of 
Smell,  Earth  is  the  material  cause  of  the  olfactory  sense.  —  325. 

That  by  which  smell  is  cognised,  is  '  gandha-jnanaih/  that  is,  the 
olfactory  sense.  Therein  '  prithivi,'  Earth,  alone  is  '  prakritih,'  the 
material  cause.  It  may  be  asked,  why  is  it  so  ?  Accordingly  he  says 
4  gandha-vatvat  ;'  for  it  has  been  said  already  that  that  which  possesses 
smell  cannot  be  originated  by  that  which  isivoid  of  smell.  The  posses 
sion  of  smell  (by  the  olfactory  sense)  or  its  odorousness  is  proved  from 
the  rule  or  well-known  uniformity  of  nature  that  the  external  senses 
themselves  possess  attributes  similar  in  kind  to  those  which  are  appre 
hensible  by  them.  If  it  be  urged,  how  then  can  there  be  such  unifor 
mity  that  the  characteristic  of  being  the  revealer  of  smell  does  not 
belong  to  the  other  members  of  the  body  but  only  to  the  olfactory  sense- 
orwan,  even  when  terrene-ness  belongs  to  all  of  them  without  distinction  V 
80  he  says  '  bhuyastvat.'  It  is  the  being  constituted  or  originated  by 
terrene  particles  uninfluenced  by  other  substances,  which  is  called 
'  bhuyastvam,'  '  predominance.'  This,  '  bhuyastvam,'  is  a  technical 
term,  and  has  been  so  used  in  the  kindred  system  (i.  e.,  the  Nydya- 
Sutram)  also.  —  5. 

Similarly  the  Senses  of  Taste,  Colour  and  Touch  are  respectively 

constituted  by  the  Elements  of  Water,  Fire  and  Air. 
Upaskdra.—'B.G  extends  the  argument  to  the  other  senses  : 


I  c  I  R  I  ^  II 

Tatha,  in  like  manner,  snq:  Apah,  waters,  ^n:  Tejah,  fire  ^pj: 
Vayuh,  air.  *3  Cha,  and.  m^^TyiffSHl^  Rasa-rupa-sparsa-avifiesat  be 
cause  of  the  non-difference  of  taste,  colour  and  touch. 

6.  In  like  manner,  Water,  Fire  and  Air  (are  the  material 
causes  of  the  sense-organs  of  Taste,  Colour  and  Touch),  inasmuch 
as  there  is  no  difference  in  the  Taste,  Colour  and  Touch  (which  they 
respectively  possess,  from  what  they  respectively  apprehend).  —  326. 

1  The  material  causes  of  the  organs  of  the  tongue,  the  eye,  and  the 
akin'  —  this  is  the  complement  of  the  aphorism.  Water,  etc.,  are  then 
respectively  the  material  causes  of  the  tongue,  etc.,  inasmuch  as  the 
latter  respectively  apprehend  the  objects  with  which  they  are  uniformly 
related.  Here  too  it  is  '  bhuyastvam,'  '  predominance,'  which  governs 
the  uniformity  (that  the  characteristics  of  being  the  revealer  of  taste> 
etc.,  belong  respectively  to  the  tongue,  etc-)  It  has  been  declared  that, 


KANlDA  SCTRAS  VIII,  2,  6.  261 


it  is  the  rule  or  uniformity  that  the  tongue,  etc.,  possess  particular 
.attributes  of  the  same  kind  as  are  apprehensible  by  them,  that  is  the 
proof  of  the  possession  of  taste,  etc.,  by  the  tongue,  etc.  Likewise  the 
organ  of  hearing  is  only  a  portion  or  division  of  Ether  confined  within 
the  hollow  of  the  ear  and  favourably  influenced  by  particular  adyistam 
or  destiny. — 6. 

Here  ends  the  second  chpater  of  the  eighth  book  in  the  Commentary 
of  Sarikara  upon  the  Vaisesika  Aphorisms. 


262  VAI&ESIKA   PHILOSOPHY 

BOOK  NINTH—  CHAPTER  FIRST. 

Perception,  e.  g.,  of  antecedent  non-existence  is  produced  ly  other  means 
than  conjunction  or  combination. 

Upaskdra.  —  After  the  determination  of  popular  or  ordinary  perception  produced" 
from  contact  or  contiguity  in  the  form  of  either  conjunction  or  combination,  the  author 
begins  the  ninth  book  of  whioh  the  object  is  to  demonstrate  ordinary  or  popular  and  super- 
ordinary  or  hyper-popular  perception  produced  from  proximity  or  presentation  due  to  other 
causes  : 


II  S.  I  t  I  t  II 

i?i  consequence  of 

the  non-existence  of  application  or  predication  of  action  and    attribute. 
prak,  prior,  antecedently.  *RT^  A-sat,  non-existent. 


1.  In  consequence  of  the  non-application  of  Action  and 
Attribute  (to  it),  (an  effect  is)  non-existent  prior  (to  its  produtcion.) 
—227. 

'An  effect/  —  such  is  the  complement  of  the  aphorism.  'Prak/  i.  e. 
prior  to  the  production  of  the  effect,  'an  effect/  e.  g.,  a  water-pot,  cloth, 
etc.,  'a-aat/  (i.  e.,  non-existent),  that  is  to  say,  the  counter-opposite  or 
contradictory  of  the  contemporaneous  non-existence  of  its  own  pro 
ducer.  Here  the  reason  is  the  impossibility  of  the  application  of  action 
and  attribute.  If  the  effect,  e.  y.,  a  water-pot,  etc.,  were  really  existent 
during  that  time  also,  then  it  would  be  affirmed  to  possess  action  and 
attribute-  As  in  the  case  of  a  water-pot  already  produced  reference- 
can  be  made  to  it  in  such  forms  as  "The  water-pot  is  at  rest/'  "Th& 
water-pot  is  in  motion/'  "The  water-pot  is  seen  to  possess  colour,"  etc., 
there  can  be  no  reference  made  to  it  in  like  manner  also  prior  to  its 
production.  It  is  therefore  inferred  that  the  water-pot  is  during  that 
time,  non-existent,  And  this,  antecedent  non-existence;  in  such  cases 
as  while  straws  are  in  the  course  of  weaving  or  threads  in  the  course 
of  joining,  or  when  clay  is  placed  on  the  potter's  wheel,  while  the- 
activity  of  the  potter,  etc.,  is  yet  going  on,  is  the  universally  experien 
ced  perceptual  cognition  that  there  will  be  in  that  place  a  mat,  or  a 
piece  of  cloth,  or  a  water-pot,  inasmuch  as  such  cognition  takes  place- 
as  soon  as  the  eyes  are  opened.  Here  proximity  or  presentation  con 
stituted  either  by  conjunction  or  by  combination  cannot  be  the  cause 
of  the  cognition.  Hence  proximity  or  presentation  in  which  the  thing 
in  itself  or  the  qualification  or  distinction  of  that  which  is  connected 
with  the  sense,  (indriya  samboddha  visesanata)  is  here  the  necessary- 
condition  of  perception.  It  cannot  be  said  that  in  this  explanation 
there  is  mutual  dependence  (of  cause  and  effect)  in  as  much  as  the- 
distinction  of  antecedent  non-existence  being  existent,  there  is  percep 
tion  of  it  and  the  perception  being  existent,  there  exists  the  distinction 
for  the  characteristic  of  being  the  distinction  is  here  really  the  proper 
or  essential  form  of  both  the  cause  and  the  effect  and  it  is  capable  of 
producing  perception  in  which  both  are  mutually  involved  and  that  is- 
really  existent  even  prior  to  the  perception  so  it  has  been  declared  in. 


KANADA  SttTRAS  IX,  1,  2.  26? 


the  Nydya-Vdrtika,  "In  the  case  of  combination  as  well  as  if  Non-exis 
tence,  the  relation  of  vis?sna  that  which  serves  to  specify  and  visesya 
that  which  is  specified,  (is  the  proximity  between  the  sense  and  the 
object)." 

This  same  antecedent  non-existence  is  productive  of  its  counter- 
opposite  (that  is,  the  object  not  yet  existent).  For  when  a  water-pot 
is  produced,  it  is  not  produced  just  at  that  very  moment.  Even  though 
the  other  (partial)  causes  existed  at  the  time,  the  iniperfectness  of  the 
cause,  being  pursued,  should  pursue  only  the  imperfectness  consisting 
of  the  antecedent  non-existence  of  the  water-pot  itself.  If  it  be 
objected  that  the  (antecedently  non-existent)  water-pot  itself  would 
then  be  an  impediment  to  its  own  production;  our  reply  is  that  since, 
by  its  non-existence  at  the  time,  it  constitutes  the  absence  of  impedi 
ment,  its  causality  should  not  be  thrown  away.  Nor  can  it  be  objected 
that  the  water-pot  itself  constituting  the  non-existence  of  its  antecedent 
non-existe.ice,  it  would  follow  that  its  antecedent  non-existence  will 
again  appear  when  the  water-pot  is  destroyed;  for,  the  destruction  of 
the  water-pot  also  is  repugnant  to  its  antecedent  non-existence,  so 
that  there  can  be  no  appearance  of  a  contradictory  also  during  the 
•existence  of  another  contradictory.  For  the  contradiction  between 
them  is  not  merely  spafci  il,  so  that  they  might  be  simultaneous  like  (the 
genera  of)  bovine-ness  and  h-jrse-ness.  The  contradiction  is  temporal 
also,  and  therefore  how  can  they  be  existent  at  one  and  the  same 
time? — 1. 

Note. — In  this  and  the  few  following  aphorism*,  the  author  deals  with  the  topic  of 
non-existence.  Now,  non-existence  is  primarily  divided  into  two  kinds,  samsarga-abhdva 
and  anyonya-abhdva.  Anyonya-abhdva  or  reciprocal  non-existence  is  characterised  as  non- 
existence  of  which  ithe  counter-opposite  (i.  e.,  the  object  non-existent)  is  determined  by 
the  relation  of  identity  ;  in  other  words,  it  is  equivalent  to  absence  of  identity,  that  is, 
difference.  Samsarga-abhdva  or  relational  non-3xistenco  is  non-existence  other  than 
reciprocal  non-existence,  and  it  is  sub-divided  as  antecedent,  consequent,  and  absolute 
non-existences. 

Bhdsya. — Non-Existence  is  not  the  seventh  predicable  inasmuch  as 
absolute  non-existence,  e.  y.,  a  castle  in  the  air,  is  not  a  predicable  at 
all,  while  non-existence  of  the  existent,  in  the  forms  of  non-production, 
destruction,  and  absence  of  identity,  cannot  exceed  the  number  of 
the  six-predicables. 

Consequent  non-existence  also  is  proved  by  perception    and  inference. 

Upatkdra. — He  states  that  another  (form  of)  non-existence  is  established  by  the  foroe 
«>f  cognition. 


?3T£  Sat,  existent.  5RTc^  A-sat,  non-existent. 
2.     The  existent  (becomes)  non-existent. — 328. 

As  the  non-existence  of  the  effect,  prior  to  the  operation  of  the 
cause,  is  proved  by  perception  and  inference,  so  is  it  proved  by  percep 
tion  and  inference,  after  the  operation  of  a  club,  etc.,  which  destroys 
it,  that  a  really  existent  effect,  e.  g.,  a  water-pot,  etc.,  is  now  non 
existent.  And  this  same  non-existence  is  commonly  described  a«. 


264  VAI&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


annihilation  or  destruction  (or  consequent  or  emergent  non-existence.) 
For  there  arise  such  cognitions  as  that  the  water-pot  is  now  destroyed, 
annihilated,  that  the  letter  ga  which  was  heard  before,  no  longer  exists, 
etc.  This  is  the  import.  —  2. 


existent  is  a  different  thing   from  tli<j  non-existent,  so  that 
after  annihilation  there  can  be  no  continuation  of  existence. 

Upaskdra.—lt  may  be  objected  :  It  is  the  same  water-pot  that  under  a  partioulai 
condition  gives  rise  to  the  idea,  or  conventional  use,  of  annihilation  ;  and  not  that  th 
annihilation  of  the  water-pot  is  different  from  the  water-pot  : 


&  I  t  I  ^  II 


:  A-satah,  from  the  non-existent.  fsKmTOtf^r^Wn^T^  Kraiya-guna- 
vyapadesa-abhavat,  in  consequence  of  the  non-existence  of  reference- 
by,  or  predication  of,  action  and  attribute.  ?T*lfaT?:JI  Artha-antaranu 
a  different  object. 

3.  (The  existent  is)  a  different  object  (from  the  non-existent), 
inasmuch  as  Action  and  Attribute  cannot  be  predicated  of  the  non 
existent.  —  329. 

Accordingly  he  says  : 

"The  existent"  —  such  is  the  complement  of  the  aphorism.  The- 
existent  is  a  different  object  from  'the  non-existent.  If  it  be  asked, 
How  ?  So  he  says,  'kriya-guna-vyapadeia-abhavat.'  For  there  can 
be  no  such  predication,  during  the  period  of  annihilation  also,  as- 
"  The  water-pot  remains,"  "  The  water-pot  exists  at  this  moment,'' 
"  The  water-pot  possesses  colour,"  "  Bring  the  water-pot,"  etc.  In 
consequence  of  this  difference,  therefore,  the  existent  is  a  different 
thing  from  the  non-existent.  —  3. 

Bhd$ya.  —  Whatrver  is  non-existent  prior  to  its  apperanoe  as  air 
effect,  is  non-existent  only  by  the  nature  of  an  effect,  but  is  really 
existent  at  the  time  by  the  nature  of  a  cause,  and  that,  therefore,  it  is- 
essentially  different  from  absolute  non-existences. 

Reciprocal  non-existence  or  absence  of  identity,  explained. 

Upaskdra.  —  Antecedent    and     consequent   non-existences      being    proved,     the    p  resent 
Aphorism  is  laid  down  with  the  purpose  of  proving  mutual  or  reciprocal  non-axistence  : 


II  S.  I  *  I  8  II 

^  Sat,  the  existent.  ^  Cha,  and,  also.  3RT^  A-sat,  non-existent. 
4.     The  existent  also  is  non-existent.  —  330. 

Where.  a  really  existent  water-pot   etc.,  are  spoken  of  as  being  non- 
,  there  non-existence  of   identity   is  perceived.     For  the-e    arise- 
"  The    horse  is  non-existent  by  the  nature    of  the    cow," 
<v  is  non-existent  by  the  nature  of  the  hoi^se,"  "  Apiece  of  cloth 


KANADA  SftTRAS  IX,  1,  5.  265 

is  non-exist«nt  by  the  nature  of  a  water-pot,"  "A  piece  of  cloth  is  a  not- 
water-pot,"  "A  cow  is  a  not-horse,"  "  A  horse  is  a  not-cow,"  etc.  Nowy 
"  A  cow  possesses  reciprocal  non-existence  with  a  horse,"  "  A  water- 
pot  possesses  reciprocal  non-existence  with  a  piece  of  cloth/'  —  it  is  this 
reciprocal  non-existence,  otherwise  called  absence  of  identity,  that 
appears  in  the  above  cognitions.  Here  identity  is  that  which  de 
termines  the  counter-oppositeness  or  contrariety  (of  absence  of 
identity).  And  this  (reciprocal)  non-existence  has  the  same  substratum 
or  denotation  or  extension  as  its  counter-opposite  (»'.  e.,  identity);  for 
there  is  such  cognition  as  that  the  water-pot  is  not  the  ground  (on 
which  it  lies).  It  is  also  eternal,  for  it  is  impossible  that  there  should 
be  at  any  time  identity  between  a  water-pot  and  a  piece  of  cloth.—  4. 

In  addition  to  antecedent,    consequent,  and  reciprocal,  non-existence, 
there  is  absolute  non-existence. 

Upaskdra.—Novf    he    describes    the    fourth    (kind    of)    non-existenoe     called    absolute 
non-existenoe. 


M  £.  I  ?  I  ¥,  M 


q^  Yat,    that,    which.    =g    Cha,    and.    ST«l^   Any  at,    different. 
A-sat,  non-existent.  ?ffi:  Atalj,  from    these,  i.  e.,  antecedent,    consequent, 
and  reciproeal,  non-existents.  ^  Tat,  that.  ITOc^  A-sat,  non-existent. 

5.     And  that  which  is  a  different    non-existent    from    these,    is 
(absolutely)  non-existent.-  —  331. 

'  Atah/  from  the  three  forementioned  non-existences,  *yat  any  at 
a-sat  tat  a-sat/  (that  which  is  a  different  non-existent  is  non-existent) 
*.  e.,  that  is  absolute  non-existence.  The  word  'a-sat'  (non-existent)  is 
in  both  the  places  used  in  a  substantive  sense.  Of  these,  one  'a-sat/ 
is  the  subject  and  the  other  '  a-sat'  is  the  predicate  in  apposition  with 
the  subject.  The  meaning  of  the  aphorism,  therefore,  eomes  to  be  this 
that  non-existence  which  is  different  from  the  three  fore-mentioned  non- 
existences,  is  absolute  non-existence.  Amongst  these,  antecedent  non- 
existence  is  limited  in  the  future  or  at  the  end,  consequent  non- 
existence  is  limited  in  the  past  or  at  the  beginning,  and  reciprocal 
non-existence  has  the  same  substratum  or  extension  as  its  counter- 
opposite  ;  but  absolute  non-existence  differs  from  all  the  three.  Hence 
it  is  the  fourth  (kind  of)  non-existence.  —  5. 


i.  —  There  are  three  things  repugnantto  absolute  non-existence, 
viz.,  the  counter-opposite  or  the  object  non-existent,  its  antecedent  non- 
existence,  and  its  consequent  non-existence.  The  ancients  teach  that  the 
cognitions  that  dark  colour  does4not  exist  (after  baking)  in  a  red  water- 
pot,  and  that  red  colour  does  not  exist  (before  baking)  in  a  dark  water-pot, 
are  conversant  about  consequent  and  antecedent  non-existences,  but  not 
absolute  non-existence.  The  moderns,  on  the  other  hand,  maintain  that 
consequent  and  antecedent  non-existences  are  not  repugnant  to  absolute 
non-existence  and  hence  that  there  certainly  is  absolute  non-existence 
also  by  reference  to  annihilation,  production,  etc.  They  hold  that  when 
a  water-pot,  etc.,  previously  removed,  are  brought  back  to  a  place, 
there  is  no  cognition  of  the  absolute  non-existence  of  the  water-pot,  so 


266  VAI£E§IKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

long  as  the  water-pot  exists,  inasmuch  as  the  time  during  which  the 
water-pot  is  existent  does  not  constitute  connection  with  non-existence. 
Some,  again,  teach  that  when  there  has  formerly  stood  in  any  place  a 
water-pot,  and  this  has  been  removed  and  brought  back  again,  there 
arises  in  this  case  cognition  of  a  fourth  kind  of  non-existence  under 
the  aspect  of  connection  (Samsarga-alhdva),  called  temporary  non- 
exist«nce,  and  not  of  absolute  non-existence. 

Causes  of  the  perception  consequent  non-existence. 

Upaskdra.  —  He  nowibegins  another  section  and  therein  states  the  causes  of  the  perception 
of  consequent  non-existenoo  : 


A-sat,  non-existent,  jfr  Tti,  such.  3JFTJK<r5TPTT3T^  Bliftta-pratyaksa- 
abhavat,  because  of  the  non-existence  of  the  perception  of  a  past  object. 
Bhuta-smriteh,  because    of    the    recollection     of  a  past    object. 
Virodhi-pratyaksa-vafc,    similar    to  the    perception    of    the 


contradictory  or  opposite. 

6.  "(It  is;  non-existent  "  —such  (perceptual  cognition)  is  similar 
to  the  perception  of  the  counter-opposite  (of  non-existence),  because 
fin  both  cases)  there  is  non-existence  of  the  perception  of  that  which 
is  past  and  gone,  and  there  is  recollection  of  the  past.-—  332. 

'  A-sat  iti  '  ;  By  the  word,  '  iti/  he  indicates  cognition  in  the  form 
of  perception.  Thereby  (it  is  obtained  that)  there  is  such  perceptual 
cognition  as  "  The  water-pot  is  non-existent,"  "  The  water-pot  has- 
been  destroyed,"  "  The  water-pot  is  now  in  a  state  of  annihilation." 
An  example  of  this  cognition  is  given  by  l  virodhi-pratyaksa-vat  '  ;  as 
there  is  clear  perception  of  the  counter-opposite  (of  existence)  e.  </.,  a 
water-pot,  etc.,  so  there  is  of  its  annihilation  or  consequent  non-exis 
tence  also.  The  reason  of  this  stated  as  'bhuta-pratyaksa-abhavat,'  which 
means,  because  there  is  non-existence  of  the  perception  of  '  bhuta,'  i.  e., 
a  water-pot,  ete.,  which  having  been  first  produced  have  been  subse 
quently  destroyed.  Hereby  the  non-apprehension  of  the  (once)  appre 
hensible  is  stated.  There,  again,  the  following  argument  is  confirma 
tory  (of  the  perceptual  cognition)  :  If  there  were  a  water-pot  here,. 
it  would  be  seen,  as  the  place  is  seen  ;  but  it  is  not  visible  ;  therefore 
there  is  none.  He  mentions  another  auxiliary  cause  :  '  bhuta-smriteh,' 
which  means,  because  there  is  recollection  of  the  counter-opposite,  e.  </., 
a  water-pot,  etc.,  which  is  past  and  gone.  Hereby  recollection  of  the 
counter-opposite  is  stated.  —  6. 

VivTiti-  —  The  four  kinds  of  non-existence  being  explained,  the  per 
ception  of  consequent  non-existence  is  explained. 

'  A-sat,  iti,'  "  The  water-pot  is  non-existent,"  The  water-pot  is 
destroyed/5  "  The  water-pot  is  annihilated,"  —  such  perception,  'virodhi- 
pratyaksavat,'  is  similar  to  the  perception  of  the  water-pot  which  is  the 


KANlDA  SftTRAS  IX,  1,  7.  267 

counter-opposite  (of  ita  non-existence),  that  is  to  say,  is  proved  by 
sense-experience  and  produced  from  the  ordinary  or  popularly  under 
stood  contact  (of  sense  and  object).  Between  them  there  is,  however, 
this  difference  that  the  perception  of  the  counter-opposite  is  produced 
from  the  conjunction  of  the  eye,  etc-,  (with  their  objects),  while  the  per 
ception  of  consequent  non-existence  is  produced  from  there  being  a» 
modification  or  qualification  (e<  g.,  non-existence  of  water-pot  in. 
("plac.e  possessing  non-existence  of  water-pot")  conjoint  with  the  eyer 
etc.  He  mentions  another  point  of  difference,  viz.,  '  bhuta-pratyaksa- 
abhavat.'  The  meaning  is  that  perception  of  consequent  non-existence- 
is  produced  from  a  cause  in  the  form  of  the  non-apprehension  of  the3 
apprehensible  consequent  on  the  non-existence  of  the  perception  of  the- 
past,  i.  «.,  the  counter-opposite,  e.  g.,  the  water-pot,  etc.,  and  also  from 
the  recollection  of  the  past  water-pot  etc.,  in  other  words,  from  cogni 
tion  of  the  counter-opposite,  which  cognition  is  here  identical  with 
recollection.  Thus  the  perception  of  consequent  non-existence  is  pro 
duced  from  the  non-perception  of  its  counter-opposite  as  well  as  from 
the  cognition  of  the  counter-opposite,  whereas  the  perception  of  the- 
eounter-opposite  is  not  so  produced.  There  is,  therefore,  difference 
between  them  in  this  respect  also.  This  is  the  import.  *  It  should  be 
observed  that  recollection  as  such  is  not  intended  (in  this  aphorism,. 
though  the  word  has  been  used),  but  mere  cognition  is  intended.  Thai 
being  so,  the  idea  is  this  that  as  the  water-pot,  etc.,  are  proved  by 
perception,  so  also  are  their  consequent  non-existences. 

Causes  of  the  perception  of   antecedent  non-existence. 

Upaskdra.  —  Extending   to    (antecedent     non-existence   the   mode   in     which    consequent 
non-existence  is  an  object  of  perception,  he  says  : 


ii  &  i  ?  i  va  u 

<fl>JT  Tatha,  similarly.  Wt&  A-bhave,  in  the  case  of  (antecedent) 
non-existence.  HTMH?^?^!^  Bhava-pratyaksa-tvat,  in  consequence  of 
the  perceptibility  of  the  .existent,  xj  Cha,  also. 

7.  Similarly  (there  is  perceptual  cognition)  of  (antecedent) 
non-existence,  in  consequence  also  of  the  perceptibility  of  the 
existent.  —  333. 

Although  this  word,  non-existence  is  a  general  terra,  still  from  the 
context  it  signifies  antecedent  non-existence.  As  there  is  perceptual 
cognition  in  the  case  of  consequent  non-existence,  so  also  in  the  case  of 
antecedent  non-existen«e.  Q.  —  How?  A  —  '  Bhava-pratyksatvat'  :  'praty- 
aksatvat,'  in  consequence  of  the  characteristic  of  being  made  an  object 
of  cognition  by  perception,  '  bhavasya,'  of  straws,  etc.,  while  these  are 
in  the  course  of  weaving  (for  a  mat  which  is  then  antecedently  non-exis-% 
cent).  Or,  the  meaning  is  this:  'pratyaksatvat,'  in  consequence  of  the  'fit 
ness'  (for  the  senses)  or  apprehensibility,  'bhavasya/  of  the  substratum  as 
well  as  of  the  counter-opposite  (t.  e.,  the  mat  after  production)  ;  in 
asmuch  as  the  apprehensibility  of  the  substratum  as  well  as  the  appre 
hensibility  of  the  counter-opposite  govern  the  apprehension  of  Samsarga- 
abhdva  or  relational  non-existence.  The  word  '  cha,'  also,  brings 


268  VAI/SE§IKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


forward  the  recollection  of  the  counter-opposite  and  the  argument 
already  stated  (in  the  preceding  aphorism,  as  contributory  causes  of 
the  perception  of  antecedent  non-existence.)  (It  ia  to  be  obserred  that),. 
although  antecedent  non-existence  has  no  beginning,  and  although 
consequent  non-existence  has  no  end,  yet  they  are  preceptible  under 
particular  conditions  only.  —  7. 

Vivfiti.  —  It  may  be  asked,  inasmuch  as  antecedent  non-existence 
has  no  beginning,  how  is  it  that  there  is  no  perception  of  it  long  before 
the  production  of  the  conjunction  of  the  two  halves  of  a  water-pot, 
etc.,  the  fore-mentioned  causes  (of  such  perception)  being  possible  at 
that  time  also?  Hence  the  author  adds,  'bhava-pratyaksatvat.' 
*  Bhava  '  means  the  final  collocation  of  causes,  according  to  its  deriva 
tion  from  the  root  bhti,,  'to  be'  by  the  affix  ghaK,  in  the  ablative  sense 
that  it  springs  from  this.  '  Bhavapratyaksatvat  '  means  the  state  or 
condition  of  that  whereof  perception  takes  place  by  means  of  '  bhava.' 
The  resultant  meaning  of  the  term,  therefore,  is,  because  it  must  be  mani 
fested  by  the  final  collocation  of  causes.  Thus,  the  import  is,  in  the 
instance  in  question,  there  can  be  no  perception  of  antecedent  non-exis 
tence  in  consequence  of  the  non-existence  of  the  final  collocation  of 
cause. 

Causes  af  the  perception  of  reciprocal  non-existence. 
.—Ho  shows  that  reciprocal  non-existenoo  is  an  object  of  perception  : 

II  £.  I  ?  I  c  l| 


Eton  a,  hereby.  *TTC:  A-ghata^,  not-water-pot.  *pft:  A-gauh,. 
not-cow.  Wiwf:  A-dharmalj,  not-dharma.  ^  Cha,  and,  also.  cWMTft: 
Vyakhyatah,  explained. 

8.     Hereby    also    are    explained  *    not-water-pot,'    '  not-cow/ 


1  Etena'  —  by  this  term  he  extends  (the  causality  of)  the  recollection 
of  the  counter-opposite,  apprehension  of  the  substratum,  and  the  .•argu 
ment  stated  before.  Non-apprehension  of  the  apprehensible  is  the  same 
in  all  cases.  The  word,  'cha,'  also,  has  the  object  of  bringing  forward 
what  has  been  stated  before.  '  A-dharma^'  :  By  saying  that  the 
reciprocal  non-existence  of  dharma,  merit,  though  it  is  supersensible, 
is  an  object  of  perception  in  its  substratum,  e.  g.:  pleasure,  knowledge, 
etc.,  he  suggests  that  in  the  apprehension  of  reciprocal  non-existence, 
apprehensibility  of  the  counter-opposite  is  not  the  governing  condition, 
but  that  only  the  apprehensibility  of  the  substratum  is  the  governing 
condition.  How  otherwise  eould  the  reciprocal  non-existenoe  of  a 
fiend,  in  the  form  that  the  pillar  is  not  .  a  fiend,  be  apprehended  in  the 
pillar  ?  For,  the  non-apprehension  of  a  fiend  as  being  coincident  or 
'identical  with  the  pillar  is  the  cause  of  the  apprehension  of  the  re 
ciprocal  non-existence  of  a  fiend  (in  the  pillar),  and,  it  is  again 
impossible,  were  the  pillar  identical  with  a  fiend,  that  there  should  be 
such  non-apprehension  (of  a  fiend  in  the  pillar),  since  such  non- 
apprehension  is  contradictory  to,  or  contravened  by,  the  existence  of 
the  entity  (e.  </.,  a  fiend)  which  is  the  counter-opposite  (of  its  non- 
existence.) 


KANiDA  SftTRAS  IX,  1,  9.  269 

Objection.  —  Identity  with  a  fiend  is  not  in  this  instance  the  counter- 
opposite.  Is  it  then  a  fiend  ?  But  it  may  be  that  though  it  is  present 
in  the  pillar,  yet,  like  its  gravity,  it  is  not  apprehended.  Hence  its 
non-apprehension  would  not  be  contradictory  to  the  existence  of  the 
•entity  which  is  the  counter-opposite,  (viz.,  a  fiend.) 

Answer.  —  It  is  not  so,  for,  like  the  non-apprehension  of  the  counter- 
opposite,  the  non-apprehension  of  that  which  determines  the  charac 
teristic  of  being  the  counter-opposite,  also  causes  the  apprehension  of 
non-existence. 

Objection.  —  The  apprehension  of  reciprocal  non-existence  is  depend 
ent  upon  the  apprehension  of  counter-opposite-ness,  and  counter-oppo- 
^iteness  is  of  the  nature  of  the  absence  of  reciprocal  non-existence; 
and  hence  it  follows  that  the  apprehension  of  reciprocal  non-existence 
is  really  dependent  upon  the  apprehension  of  reciprocal  non-existence. 

Answer.  —  This  is  not  the  case;  for,  as  has  been  already  stated,  it  is 
a.  property  which  is  cognised  as  being  not  present  in  any  given  subs 
tratum,  that  determines  the  characteristic  of  being  the  counter-opposite, 
but  the  apprehension  of  that  property  also  as  that  which  determines 
counter-opposite-ness,  is  not  the  governing  condition  (of  the  apprehen 
sion  of  reciprocal  non-existence.)  —  8. 

Vivriti.  —  The  causes  of  the  apprehension  of  reciprocal  non-exis 
tence  are  determination  (or  possession  of  attribution,  or  intrinsic  form) 
in  relation  to  the  senses,  —  indriya-nambaddha-visesanatdj  —  non-appre 
hension  of  the  counter-opposite,  and  cognition  of  the  counter-opposite- 
The  difference,  however,  is  this  that  the  perceptibility  of  the  counter- 
opposite  is  the  condition  of  apprehension  of  Samsarga-abhdva  or  rela 
tional  non-existence,  whereas  it  is  the  perceptibility  of  the  substratum 
that  is  the  condition  of  apprehension  of  reciprocal  non-existence.  Thus, 
in  spite  of  the  super-sensibility  of  dharma  or  merit,  there  is  no  impedi 
ment  to  the  perception  of  its  reciprocal  non-existence  in  the  sensible 
•substratum  thereof,  e.  g.,  pleasure  and  the  like.  Whereas  some  have 
taught  that  perceptibility  of  both  the  counter-opposite  and  the  sub 
stratum  is  the  condition  of  apprehension  of  relational  non-existence, 
this  is  inaccurate  ;  for,  were  this  the  case,  since  the  perception  of  non- 
existence  of  fragrance  in  a  stone,  of  non-existence  of  bitterness  in 
treacle,  of  non-existence  of  colour  in  air,  and  of  non-existence  of  touch 
.as  well  as  sound  in  ether  would  be  impossible  their  respective  substrata 
would  not  be  perceptible  to  the  several  senses  cognisant  thereof  res 
pectively.  It  is  from  this  consideration  that  Paksadhara  Misra  has 
maintained  that  the  perception  of  the  destruction  (or  cessation)  of  the 
touch  of  air  is  produced  by  the  determination  or  qualification  thereof 
by  time  conjoint  with  the  skin. 

Perception  of  absolute  non-exivtence,  how  produced. 

Upaskdra  —Now  in  this  aphorism   he   says   that   absolute    non-existence    is   an    object  of 
perception: 


ii  s.  i  ?  i  s.  ii 


A-bhutam,  not  produced.  5f  Na,  not.     tff^T  Asti,  exists,     ffa  Itir 
this.   *H*lfrtH?j;  An-artha-antaram,  not  different  objects. 


270  VAI£E§IKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

9.     That  which  has    not  been    produced,  does  not  exist;  —  this  is- 
an  identical  proposition.  —  335. 

That  which  was  produced,  at  present  does  not  exist  —  such  cogni 
tion  rests  upon  annihilation,  and  is  not  conversant  about,  or  does  not 
bring  out,  the  having  been  produced;  whereas  perceptual  cognition 
which  embraces  simply  this  that  it  does  not  exist,  reposes  upon  absolute 
non-existence.  'A-bhutam,'  (that  which  has  not  been  produced), 
denotes  non-cognizance  of  production  and  destruction.  The  being 
'an-artha-antaram,'  not  different  objects,  also  has  the  same  purport 
only.  For  example,  Earth-ness  dues  not  exist  in  Water,  and  Water- 
ness  does  not  exist  in  Earth.  For,  were  there  Earth-ness  in  watery 
wholes,  it  would  be  perceived,  but  it  is  not  perceived,  therefore  it  does 
not  exist;  —  a  reference  to  such  argument  is  to  be  observed  in  this  case 
also.  We  must,  in  like  manner,  hold  that  there  is  absolute  non-exis 
tence  of  a  thing  where  such  a  thing  will  never  be,  nor  even  has  been, 
produced.  The  cognition,  on  the  other  hand,  in  the  form  that  it  does  not 
exist,  of  the  non-existence  in  their  substratum,  of  that  which  has  been, 
and  that  which  will  be,  depends  upon  consequent  non-existence  and  ante 
cedent  non-existence.  Hence  it  is  that  this  (absolute  non-existence)  is  de 
signated  as  absolute  or  illimitable  and  as  of  trinal  time  or  eternal.  —  9. 

Vivriti.  —  'Na  asti  iti,'  perception  in  the  form  that  something  does 
not  exist,  which  is  'abhutam/  not  conversant  about  the  past,  'an-artha- 
antaram,'  that  is,  has  for  its  object  nothing  but  absolute  non-existence, 
such  as  consequent  non-existence  etc.  *  *  *  *.  The  word  'bhuta'  or 
past  includes  the  future  also. 

The  perception,  "Tht  water-pot  dot-u  not  (71010)  wist  in  the  room,"  explained. 

Upaskdra.—It  may  be  objected:  The  non-existence  of  the  water-pot  in  the  room 
is  not  absolute  non-existenoe,  because  of  the  existence  of  the  water-pot  there  at  some 
time  or  other.  Nor  is  it  either  antecedent  non-oxietenoe  or  consequent  non-existence, 
for  they  appear  only  in  combinative  causes.  Nor  is  it  absolute  non-existence  undergoing 
production  and  destruction,  for  the  expression  'absolute  non-existence  undergoing  pro- 
dcution  and  destruction'  involves  a  contradiction  in  terms.  Nor  is  it  a  fourth  kind 
of  samsarga-abhdva  or  non-existence  of  association,  since  inithat  case  the  three-fold  division 
of  the  non-existenoe  of  association  would  be  disproved. 

To  meet  this  objection,  he  says  :  , 


:  u 

«f  Na,  not.  uf^T  Asti,  exists,  qi:  Grhatah,  water-pot,  ff^  Gehe,  in 
the  room.  $f?T  Iti,  such.  ^T:  Satah,  existent,  vrapj  Grhatasya,  of  water- 
pot.  Jfr^nEffafrre^  Geha-samsarga-pratisedhah,  negation  of  association 
with  the  room. 

10.  The  water-pot  does  not  exist  in  the  room  —  such  is  (the 
form  of)  the  negation  of  association  of  the  existent  water-pot  with 
the  room.  —  336. 

(*  Geha-samsarga-pl-atisedhah  'means)  the  negation  or  privation  of 
the  association  or  conjunction  of  the  water-pot  with  the  room.  And  it 
would  be  simply  absolute  non-existence,  if  the  water-pot  do  not  exist 


KANADA  SUTRAS  IX,  1, 10.  271 


at  any  time  whatever  ;  antecedent  non-existence,  in  the  case  of  the 
water-pot  which  will  exist;  and  consequent  non-existence,  in  the  case  of 
the  water-pot  which  had  its  existence  in  the  past. 

Objection. — That  being  so,  the  cognition  should  have  been  in  this 
form  that  connection  of  the  water-pot  does  not  exist  in  the  room. 

Answer. — What  is  meant  by  '  the  cognition  should  have  been  ;  ?  If 
it  means  l  the  cognition  of  which  the  actual  object  or  content  is  the 
-connection  of  the  water-pot,  should  have  been,'  and  so  conveys  the 
sense  of  inclusion,  then  what  is  desired  is  obtained.  If,  on  the  other 
hand,  it  means  '(the  cognition)  which  refers  to  or  suggests  that  (i.  e., 
connection  of  the  warer-pot),'  then  (we  reply  that),  it  is  the  reference 
to  the  substratum,  viz-,  in  the  room,  which  leads  to,  and  results  in,  the 
reference  to  the  connection,  inasmuch  as  it  is  the  being  the  substratum 
that  appears  in  the  form  of  con.nection  of  the  property  (or  conjunction 
-of  the  contained.) 

Objection. — Does  then  the  water-pot  really  exist  there  V 

Answer. — What  do  you  mean  by  '  really  exist  '?  Is  it  combined  or 
•conjunct  ?  It  cannot  be  the  first  since  there  is  in  the  room  non-exis 
tence,  of  the  water-pot  as  combined  with  it  (that  is,  since  the  room  is 
not  the  material  cause  of  the  water-pot).  Nor  the  latter,  since  there  is 
denial  of  conjunction. 

Objection. — It  would  then  follow  that  the  water -pot,  etc.,  are  always 
present,  inasmuch  as  there  is  everywhere  denial  only  of  the  one  or  the 
other  of  their  conjunction  and  combination. 

Answer. — This  would  not  follow,  since  the  denial  itself  of  both  of 
them  is  idcntial  with  the  denial  of  the  water-pot.  Are  then  the  water- 
pot  and  its  conjunction  one  and  the  same  thing,  whereby  denial  of  con 
junction  of  the  water-pot  would  be  the  denial  of  the  water-pot  ?  Are 
then  the  water-pot  and  its  combination  one  and  the  same  thing,  where 
by  the  admission  itself  of  its  combination  would  be  the  admission  of  the 
water-pot  ?  For,  there  is  not  presence  of  the  water-pot  there  where 
both  of  them  (conjunction  and  combination)  are  denied,  whereby  the 
water-pot  might  be  in  constant  agreement.  Thus  it  is  the  denial  or 
negations  of  the  admission  or  affirmation  of  something,  that  constitutes 
the  denial  or  negation  of  that  thing.  ..  / 

Or,  it  may  be  that  there  is  really  absolute  non-existence  of  tho 
water-pot  in  the  room  in  the  relation  of  being  in  combination,  and  that 
it  is  this  (absolute  non -existen.ee)  that  is  the  object  of  the  cognition  that 
the  water-pot  does  not  exist  in  the  room  ;  as  for  example,  (there  is 
absolute  non-existence  of  the  water-pot)  in  the  potsherd  in  the  relation 
of  being  in  conjunction. 

Objection. — Such  being  the  case,  the  water-pot  would  be  non-exis 
tent,  being  the  counter-opposite  of  the  constantly  present  absolute 
non-existence. 

Answer- — It  would  be  so,  were  it  everywhere  non-existent  under  the 
joint  characteristics  of  being  in  conjunction  and  being  in  combi 
nation. — 10. 


272  VAI£E§IKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

Perception  of  the  Soul,  how  produced,  in  the  yogins    who  are  (called) 

united. 

Upaskdra.  —  Having  thus  ascertained  popular  perception  having  for  its  object  existence 
and  non-existence,  he  begins  a  new  section  in  order  to  ascertain  the  perception  of  the 
yoyint  : 

fi.  I  ?  I  «  I 


Atmani,    in   the    soul.    «TTW?^T:    Atma-manasoh,  of    soul    and 
mind.    ^nftMftsflMT^    Samyoga-visesat,     from     a     particular     conjunction- 
Atma-pratyaksara,  perception  of  the  soul. 


11.     Perceptual  cognition  of  the  Soul  (results)  from   a  particu 
lar  conjunction  of  the  Soul  and  the  Mind  in  the  Soul.  —  337. 

"  Knowledge  is  produced  "  —  such  is  the  complement  (of  the  aphor 
ism.)  Now,  the  yogins  or  ascetics  are  divided  into  two  classes  ;  those 
whose  internal  organs  have  been  steadied  in  samddhi  or  deep  medita 
tion,  and  they  are  called  united  ;  and  those  whose  internal  organs  are 
no  longer  steadied  in  samddhi,  and  they  are  called  disunited-  Therein 
those  who  are  united,  having  with  eagerness  fixed  their  mind  on  the 
object  to  be  presented  to  it,  are  engaged  in  constant  meditation  ;  and 
in  them  cognition  of  the  soul,  of  their  own  souls  as  well  as  of  the  souls 
of  others,  is  produced.  '  Atrna-pratyaksariV  means  in  the  manner  of  the 
cognition  in  which  the  soul  is  the  percept  or  object  of  immediate 
presentation  or  intuition.  Although  in  ourselves  and  others  also, 
cognition  of  the  soul  sometimes  exists  or  appears,  yet,  as  it  is  obscured 
by  avidyd  or  nescience,  it  has  been  declared  to  be  virtually  non-existent. 
'  Atma-manasoh  samyoga-visesat  '  means  from  particular  contiguity 
between  the  soul  and  the  mind,  i;amely,  a  favourable  influence  by  virtue 
born  of  yoga  or  holy  communion.  —  11. 

Vivriti.  —  Having  examined  perception  produced  through  ordinary 
or  physical  presentation  or  contiguity,  he  now  explains  perception 
produced  through  super-ordinary  or  hyper-physical  presentation  or 
contiguity. 

*  Atma-manaso^  samyoga-visesat,'  from  the  conjunction  of  the  soul 
and  mind,  accompanied  by  the  power  or  virtue  born  of  yoga,  or  holy 
communion  ;  '  Atmani,'  there  being  effort  or  volition  towards  the  origi 
nation  of  understanding,  (dtmdjne&uing  volition)  on  the  authority  of 
the  lexicography  :  "  Soul  or  Atmd,  Volition,  Patience  or  Contience, 
Understanding  (are  synonymous),"  —  that  is  to  say,  when  there  arises 
the  thought^  produced  by  volition  towards  the  origination  of  under 
standing  ;  'Atma-pratyaksam/  perception  of  one's  own  soul  as  well  as 
of  the  souls  of  others  ;  "  takes  plaee/'  this  is  the  complement  of  the 
aphorism. 

ITow,  super-ordinary  or  hypher-physical  presentation  or  contiguity 
is  three-fold,  according  to  its  division  as  Sdmdnya-lakaand,  having  the 
form  of  the  genus,  jfidna-laksand,  having  the  form  of  cognition,  and 
yogaja-dharma,  virtue  or  power  born  of  holy  communion.  Therein 
yogaja-dharma  is  a  particular  merit  or  virtue  produced  by  the  practice- 


KANADA  StiTRAS  IX,  1,  13.  273 

of  yoga  or  holy  communion,  and  to  the  existence  of  which  the  Vedas, 
Puranas,  etc.,  testify.  It  is  again  two-fold  according  to  the  two-fold- 
ness  of  the  yoyins  as  those  who  are  united  or  have  attained  to  holy 
communion  mid  those  who  are  in  the  process  of  being  united  or  are  in  the 
course  of  attaining  to  holy  communion.  Among  them  those  are  called 
the  unit  t'd,  who  have  subdued  their  mind  or  inner  sense  by  the  practice 
of  yoga  and  have  achieved  the  siddhis  or  <  powers/  perfection  or  attain 
ments  by  means  of  Samddhi  or  meditation.  It  is  they  that  are  also 
called  the  specially  united,  on  account  of  their  possessing  conspicuous 
or  advanced  yoga.  Those  who  are  in  the  process  of  being  united  are  they 
whose  minds  are  turned  away  from  objects  of  the  senses  and  who  are 
immediate  beholders  of  all  objects  through  the  accompaniment  of  con 
templation.  The  present  aphorism  has  been  laid  down  with  reference  to 
such  yog-inn  only. 

Xott.  —  It  would  seem  that  the  word  viyukta  has  been  differently  used  by  SaAkara  Misrct 
and  Jayandrdyana  ;  by  the  former  in  tho  sense  of  the  disunited,  and  by  the  latter  as  denoting 
those  who  are  specially  united  through  the  possession  of  highly  advanced  yoga  Vide  IX.  »'.  IS 
infra,  Upaskdra.  Sahkara  Misra  obviously  does  not  recognise  the  distinction,  made  by 
Jayanilrdyana,  of  the  united  and  those  in  the  process  of  being  united.  According  to  him,  yogiut 
are  of  rwo  classes,  namely,  the  united  and  the  ultra-united  or  dis-united. 

Omniscience  of  the  united  yogins,  how  possible. 

L'pathira.  —  Do  then  the  tinned  have  cognition  in  respect  of  the  -soul  only?  How  there 
fore  oau  they  possess  omniscience  ?  In  roplyito  these  possible  queries,  he  says  : 


N  &  i  ?  i  33  ii 

mil  Tatha,  similarly.  3*11^3  Dravya-antaresu,  in  the  case  of  other 
substances.    SCT^R  Pratyaksaih,  perceptual. 


12.     Perceptual  (cognition  is)  similarly  (produced)  in   the    case 
of  the  other  substances.  —  338. 

"  Cognition  is  produced  '•  —this  is  implied  by  the  context.  <Tath&  ' 
means  by  the  mind,  only  as  favourably  influenced  by,  or  accompained 
with,  the  virtue  or  power,  born  of  yoga  or  holy  communion.  '  Dravya- 
antaresu  '  means  in  respect  of  the  four  kinds  of  ultimate  atoms,  the 
mind,  air,  space,  time  and  ether.  By  the  term,  substance,  are  included 
attribute,  action  and  genus  inhering  in  substance  ;  the  predicable, 
species,  combination  ;  also  gravity,  elasticity,  etc.,  appertaining  to 
things  which  are  not  objects  of  perception  ;  and  also  volition,  the  sourc* 
of  vitality  (or  spontaneity),  non-discriminative  thought,  dharma, 
adharma,  etc.,  residing  in  the  soul.  For  the  favourable  influence  of  the 
virtue  or  power  born  of  yoga  is  equivalent  to  a  perceptive  apparatus  ; 
otherwise  omniscience  would  not  be  affirmed  (of  those  who  are 
united.')  —  12. 

Omniscience  belong  also  to  those  yogina  who  are  (called)  dis-united. 

Upnskiira.  —  Having  described  the  perceptual  cognition  of   the  united,  he    now  describe* 

that  of  tho  disunited. 

I!  €.  I  ?  I  t^  II 


274  VAI!§ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


A-samahita-antahkaranah,  whose  internal  organs 
are  not  attached  to  meditation.  SH*f£d^*TT>5ni:  Upsamhrita-samadhayahj 
who  have  given  up  meditation,  for  Tesam,  their.  «5  Cha,  also. 


13.  They  whose  internal  sense-organs  are  not  attached  to 
meditation,  are  those  by  whom  meditation  has  been  given  up.  They 
too  (have  perception  of  hidden  and  distant  objects.)  —  339. 

1  Upasamhrita-samadhayah  '  is  simply  an  explication  of  '  asamahita- 
antahkaramih.'  Or,  to  the  question,  why  they  are  called  '  asmahita- 
antahkaranal?  '  V  the  reply  is  given  by  '  upasamhrita-samadnayah,' 
meaning,  because  they  are  those  by  whom.  '  Sarnadhi  '  of  which 
the  essence  is  constant  meditation,  '  upasamhrita,'  has  been  thrown 
away.  For  they,  being  able  to  transced  the  senses  through  the 
influence  ^>f  Samddhi,  absorption  or  intentness  of  mind  on  o;ie 
acquiring  Sarira-Siddhi,  powers  over,  or  perfection  of,  the  physical 
object  only,  and,  organism,  e.  </.,  the  power  of  attenuation,  etc.,  and 
Indriya-Siddhi,  powers  over,  perfection  of,  the  senses,  e.  (/-,  the  power 
of  hearing  at  a  distance,  i.  c.,  clair-audience,  etc.,  and  then  feeling 
the  insufficiency  of  Samddhi  itself,  realise  the  need  of  other  parctices 
as  referred  to  in  following  and  other  texts  of  the  Veda  :  rTT^^I^J 
f%<  m^t  f%*ft^T  ^*I  3*T?**I,  There  is  need  for  it  so  long  as  I  am 
not  freed  and  fulfilled.  They  learn  that  every  form  of  blioya  or 
experience  whether  agreeable  or  disagreeable,  must  be  undergone, 
and  that  they  will  undoubtedly  reach  firm  ground  from  which  there  is 
710  fall,  only  after  experiencing  Karma-dtaya,  vehicles  of  karma,  »  c., 
physical  organisms,  previously  merited  or  acquired,  in  different 
countries,  divisions  of  the  land,  peninsulas,  etc.,  by  different  births  as 
horses,  elephant,  birds,  serpents,  etc.,  as  well  as  by  existence  as  celes 
tials,  sages,  or  men.  They,  therefore,  make  the  whole  universe  of 
things,  hidden  and  distant,  the  objects  of  their  perception,  the  powers 
of  their  senses  having  been  enlarged  or  heightened  by  the  force 
of  the  virtue  or  power  born  of  Yoga.  —  13. 

Vivriti.  —  After    describing    the    perception    of    the    yoyin  who    is  in 
course  of  union,  he  describes  that  of  the  yoyin  who  has  attained  union. 

'Asamahita-antahkaranah,'  those  whose  internal  sense  is  destitute 
of  tiamddhi  or  meditation  ;  'upasamhrita-samadhayah,'  those  by  whom 
samadhi  or  deep  meditation  has  been  consummated,  that  is,  carried  to 
fruition,  in  whom  are  produced  the  various  siddhiy,  perfections  or 
attainments  which  are  the  fruit  of  samddhi  or  deep  meditation;  —  such 
united  yog  ins  attain  perception  of  souls  and  other  substances.  Such  is 
the  sense  to  be  gathered  from  the  aphorism-  In  fine,  in  the  perception 
of  the  yoyin  who  is  in  course  of  union,  there  is  need  for  dhydna,  thought 
or  contemplation,  while  in  the  perception  of  the  yoyin  who  is  united, 
there  is  no  need  of  satnddhi  or  meditation  involving  thought  or  con 
templation. 


.  According  to  the  vivriti,  'the  word  'asam4hita-antahk»ranah'  would  seem  not  to 
have  syntactical  connection  in  the  approhism.  The  classification  of  yoyins,  made  by 
Jayantirdyana,  is,  therefore,  so  far  unsatisfactory. 


KANlDA  StTTRASIX,  1,14.  275 

The  Yog  in'  a  perception  of  Substance,  Attribute  and  Action, 
popularly  explained. 

UpasMra.  —  It  may  be  objected:  In  them  (»'  «.,  substances,  etc.)  cognition  (of  the  Ypgins) 
is  not  mental,  inasmuch  as  the  mind  is  no*  self-dependent  outside  its  sphere.  Nor  ia  it  »• 
product  of  the  external  senses;  for,  they  apprehend  objects  present  as  being  connected  with 
them,  depend  upon  the  development  of  colour,  etc.,  as  the  case  may  be,  to  the  degree  of 
perceptibility,  and  particularly  depend  also  upon  light,  etc. 

In  anticipation  of  this  objection,  he  proves  'proximity'  (».  «.,  the  medium  of  cognition)  in 
the  case  of  certain  predioables,  and  says: 


Tat-samavayat,    from    combination    with   that,  i.e.,  subs 
tance.     qTFFtJTQt!!  karmma-gunesu,  in  respect  of  actions  and  attributes. 


14.  (Perception)  of  Actions  and  Attributes  (arises)  from  (their) 
combination  with  Substance.  —  340. 

"  Perceptual  cognition  is  produced"  —  this  is  the  complement  (of 
the  aphorism.)  If  the  elemental  senses  are  dependent  upon  some  pre 
sentation  or  contiguity  (of  objects  to  them  for  the  apprehension  of 
those  objects  by  them),  then  from  the  combination  in  that  which  is  in 
conjunction  with  the  mind  of  the  perceiver,  cognition  of  the  genera 
of  attributes  combined  or  inhering  in  the  ultimate  atoms,  ether,  space 
and  timo,  is  produced  and  in  the  case  of  other  substances,  since 
there  is  conjunction  with  them  of  various  sterile  (seed-less  ?)  minds, 
favourably  directed  towards,  or  taken  over  for,  the  experience  of  mortal 
coils,  cognition  is  produced  in  respect  of  the  attributes,  etc.,  of  those 
substances  through  their  combination  in  those  substances  which  are 
thus  conjoint  with  those  minds.  This  is  declared  here,  regard  being  had 
to,  or  in  view  of  easy  demonstration.  In  fact,  in  the  case  of  the  external 
senses  as  well  as  of  the  mind,  it  is  the  virtue  or  power  born  of  yoga  that 
constitutes  the  '  proximity  '  or  presentation  to  the  senses,  inasmuch 
as  all  uncertainty  or  impossibility  of  proof  is  set  at  rest  by  it  alone. 
Tho  drinking  up  of  the  ocean  by  Agastya  (the  sage),  and  the  conver 
sion  of  the  kingdom  of  Dandaka  into  a  forest  are  examples  in  point. 
-.14. 

Vivriti.  —  It  may  be  urged  that  omniscience  is  not  possible  or  proved 
in  the  1'oyin,  for  though  there  be  perception  of  substances,  there  is  no 
such  cognition  of  attributes,  etc.  Accordingly  he  says  : 

The  meaning  is  that  from  combination  of  '  that/  i.  e.,  conjunction 
of  mind  facilitated  by  the  power  or  virtue  born  of  Yoga  or  holy  com 
munion,  there  is  produced  in  the  Yogin,  whether  united  or  in  course  of 
union,  perception  of  attributes  and  actions. 

*  *  *  The  term  k  of  actions  and  attributes  '  is  indicative,  and 
genus,  etc.,  also  are  to  be  understood.  In  a  like  manner,  should  be 
understood  perception  produced  from  super-ordinary  or  hyper-physical 
presentation  or  contiguity  in  the  form  of  Sdmdnya-laJesana  or  general 
implication,  and  jndna-laksana  or  implication  of  cognition. 


276  VAlgE§IKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


The  Y  ogins  perceive  the  attributes  of  their  own  souls  in  the  popular  way. 

Uva«kdra.—ls  it  then,  it  may  be  asked,  combination  with   that   which   is   conjoint   with 
,ome   other   substance,  that   constitutes  the  presentation  or  '  proximity  'to  the  mind  ^  even  i 
the  case  of  one's  own  understanding,  etc.  ?     He  replies,  No  : 


^  Atma-Samavajat,  from  combination  in  the  soul. 
Atma-Gunesu,  in  respect  of  the  attributes  of  the  soul. 

15      (Perceptual     cognition)     of   the   attributes   of    the    Soul 
(results)  from  (their)  combination  in  the  Soul.  —  341. 

«  Perceptual  cognition  of  the  yogins  is  produced"—  this  is  the  topic 
Perceptual  cognition  of  understanding,  etc.,  combined    in  the  soul  is  on 
the    other    hand     produced    simply    from    combination  in    the  conjoint 
(t.c  ,  the  soul  which  is  conjoint  with  the  mind),  as    it  is    with    ourselves' 
and  others       Ihe    meaning,  therefore,  is  that  in  such  cognition  there  ik 
no    dependence    upon    any    other  form    of    contiguity    or  presentation' 
Now,    ordinary    or    popular    perception    is    cognition,    which    is    never 
changing,  produced     from    the  contact    of  the    senses    and    objects      It 
may    be  said    to  be  produced  by  objects.     Perception  is  connected  with 
the  genus  of  presentation    (that    is,    without    some    form    of    immediate 
presentation,    there    can    be    no    perception).     And    this    is  common  to 
ordinary  or    popular  and    to    super-ordinary    or    hyper-popular    Co«mi- 

t!071S.  -  15. 


n*4t?~\vevr'*°^PLnt.heililltlbook     °f    the    Commentary 
of  bankara  on  the  \  aisesika  Aphorisms.  y 

BhCtsya.-lii  the  view  of  Kandda,  there  are  only    three    independent 
and    ultimate    predicates,    namely,    Substance,  Attribute,  and  Action 
jr   while  describing  the  process  of  yoyic    cognition   of  all    realities,    he 
deals  with  these  three  predicates  only  and  is  entirely  silent  with  regard 
to  the  other  so-called  predicables. 


KANiDA  S&TRAS  IX,  2,  1.  277 


BOOK  NINTH— CHAPTER  SECOND. 

Marks  of  inference  enumerated. 

Upaskdra. — Thus  in  the  preceding  chapter  the  perception  of  goyins  and  non-yogin* 
IIBH  been  determined  aouording  to  its  cause,  its  nature,  and  its  characteristic.  Of  the  two 
kinds  into  which  pramJna  or  proof  has  been  divided,  viz.,  perceptual  or  sensuous  and 
inferential  or  produced  by  marks,  the  author  now  commences  to  determine  that  which  is 
produced  by  means  of  marks  : 


has 


II   5.  I  R  I  ?  II 


Asya,  of  this,  f^  Idam,  it.  qn«4  Karyyam,  effect.  Tl^Hi  Karanam, 
cause.  *f4lfa  Samyogi,  conjunct.  f^ttfe  Virodhi,  contradictory,  ?=R«rTfo 
.Samavayi,  combined.  «gf  Cha,  or.  jft  Iti,  such.  5fflF«FH  Laingikam,  produced 
by  the  mark  of  inference,  mediate. 

1.  "It  is  the  effect  or  cause  of,  conjunct  with,  contradictory 
to,  or  combined  in,  this,"  —  such  is  (cognition)  produced  by  the^ 
mark  of  inference.  —  342. 

'  Cognition'  —  this  is  the  topic  in  hand.  '  Laingikam  '  means  pro 
duced  from  liny  am  or  mark.  Line/am  is  a  property  of  the  paksa,  possess 
ing  vydptij  pervasion  or  invariable  concomitance  with  the  major  term. 
Therein  vydpti  has  been  already  declared.  (Vide  III.  i.  14,  supra.}  One 
thing  is  paksa  in  relation  to  another,  when  there  is  in  the  former  non- 
existence  of  proof  or  evidence  repugnant  to  the  desire  for  proving  the 
latter.  Such  evidence  includes  proof  and  disproof,  or  is  demonstrative 
as  well  as  obstructive,  for  a  paksa  or  minor  term  is  that  which  contains 
non-existence  of  both  of  them.  For,  there  existing  either  demonstrative 
or  obstructive  evidence,  no  one  feels  doubt  or  desire  of  demonstration. 
It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  ancients  defined  the  paksa  to  be  an  object 
wherein  the  existence  of  the  sddhya,  that  which  has  to  be  established, 
the  major  term,  is  doubtful,  or  an  object  wherein  the  existence  of  the 
xddhya,  is  desired  to  be  demonstrated.  According  to  Jlvandtha  Miira, 
a  paksa  is  that  in  which  there  is  non-existence  determined  by  the  being 
evidence  preventive  of  the  appearance  of  doubt  terminable  by  the  ascer 
tainment  of  the  possession  of  producible  sddhya.  Some  others  say  that 
that  is  &  paksa  in  which  there  isnon-existence  of  demonstrativeevidence 
accompanied  with  absence  of  desire  of  proof.  In  this  view,  the  nature 
of  the  paksa  will  exist  even  in  the  case  of  obstruction  (i.  e.,  even  where 
obstructive  evidence,  in  other  words  evidence  which  disproves  the 
•existence  of  the  major  term  in  the  minor,  exists.)  This  then  may  be 
seen  in  the  Anumdna-Mayukha. 

It  then  becomes  apparent  that  the  property  or  characteristic  of 
this  paksa  is  the  lih-ja  or  mark  of  inference.  And  the  cognition,  in  the 
form  of  a  preseutative  state  of  consciousness,  which  the  mark,  whether  it 
be  a  visible,  an  inferred,  or  a  heard  one,  produces,  is  '  laingikam'  or 
that  which  is  produced  from  a  mark.  Accordingly  it  has  been  said. 


278  VAI&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


That  mark  is  the  medium  of  inference,  which  is  connected  with 
that  which  is  to  be  inferred,  is  known  to  exist  in  that  which  is  accom 
panied  with  that  which  is  to  be  inferred,  and  does  not  exist  at  all 
where  that  does  not  exist. 

If  is,  therefore,  the  mark    which  is    the    instrument    of    inferential 
cognition,  and  not  its  pardmarsa,  subsumption,  inasmuch  as  subsnraption, 
being  destitute  of  function,  lacks  causality  whereas  lit  is  the  same  (i.  e.r 
to  cause  inference)  that  is  th*  function  of  the  mark. 

Objection. — How  can  there  be  illation  or  inferential  cognition, 
where  the  smoke,  etc.,  (i.  e.,  marks)  are  either  past  or  future  ? 

Answer—This  is  not  a  valid  objection,  as  in  this  case  the  sddhya 
or  that  which  is  to  be  proved,  is  also  inferred  as  past  or  future. 

Objection. — How  can  there  be  illation  where,  in  consequence  of  au 
impediment  in  the  case,  it  is  not  ascertained  whether  the  smoke  etc., 
be  past,  future  or  present  ? 

Answer— There  can  be  by  no  means,  since  in  such  an  instance 
there  is  uncertainty  also  as  to  the  sddhya,  that  which  is  to  be  proved. 

Objection.— How  can  an  illation  take  place   where  there  is  certainty 
as  to  the  existence  (of  the  mark)    on  a    previous    and  a    following    day 
and  uncertainty  as  to  the  intermediate  day  ? 

Answer. — In  such  a  case,  the  inferential  cognition  results  from  the 
inference  of  fire,  etc.,  limited  to  those  days,  by  means  of  smoke,  etc  , 
limited  to  those  days,  such  having  been  ascertained  to  be  the  causalitv 
of  vydptt,,  pervasion  or  the  universal  concomitance  of  the  major  and' 
minor  terms,  (in  the  process  of  inference.) 

Objection — How  does  inferential  cognition  arise  from  a  cloud  of 
dust  mistaken  for  smoke  V 

Answer. — It  is  because  that  which  is  understood  to  be  pervaded 
(i.  e.,  the  cloud  of  dust,  supposed  to  be  smoke,  and  therefore  pervaded 
by  fire),  is  the  mark  of  inference,  and  because  the  inference  is 
correct  or  incorrect  according  to  the  correctness  or  incorrectness  of 
such  understanding  ;  else  how  should  your  own  paramar-sa  or  subsum  j- 
tion  be  the  instrument  (of  inferential  cognition)  in  such  a  case  V 

Objection.— In  the  case  of  a  '  supersensible  mark,  pardmarsa  or  sub- 
sumption  not  being  producible  thereby,  how  can  the  mark  have 
the  function  (of  being  the  means  of  inference)  ? 

Answer. — Such  function  is  effected  by  there  being  a  practical  or 
saving  argument  demonstrative  of  existence  (  ksaimika  sddhanata),  for 
otherwise,  the  function  of  combination  in  the  case  of  hearing,  etc  .' 
would  not  be  possible. 

Inference  results  from  a  mark  which  is  an  effect,  as  the  inference 
of  fire,  etc.,  from  smoke,  light,  etc.  ;  also  from  (a  mark  which  is)  a 
cause,  as  the  inference  of  sound  by  a  deaf  man  from  a  particular  con 
junction  of  the  drum  and  the  drumstick,  or  the  inference  of  dharma  or 
merit,  heaven,  etc.,  by  a  pious  man  from  the  due  performance  of. 


KANiDA   S&TRAS  IX,  2,  2. 


sacrifice,  ablution,  etc.,  or  the  inference  of  rain  from  the  due  perfor 
mance  of  kdrlri  or  Sacrifice  for  rain,  or  the  inference  of  the  efflux  of 
water  from  a  channel  which  men  are  digging  out  from  a  river,  etc.,  full 
of  water,  or  the  inference  of  the  rising  of  a  stream  from  the  observation 
of  rain  overhead.  This  is,  then,  a  single  connection,  characterised  as 
the  relation  of  effect  and  cause,  which  has  been  stated  in  two  ways. 
Inference  from  a  conjunct  object  is  such  as  the  inference  of  the  sense- 
organ  of  the  skin  from  the  observation  of  the  physical  organism  which 
is  in  conjunction  with  it.  Inference  from  a  contradictory  or  repugnant 
object  is  such  as  the  inference  of  an  ichneumon  concealed  by  bushes, 
•etc.,  from  the  observation  of  an  excited  snake  which  is  its  natural 
-ants:-j'>:iist.  Inference  from  a  combined  object  is  such  as  the  inference 
of  fire  connected  with  water  by  means  of  the  warmth  of  the  water.  —  1. 

Vivriti  —  *  *  *  *  Cognition  by  means  of  marks  is  of  three  kinds, 
according  as  it  contains  a  cause,  or  an  effect  or  a  co-existent  thing  as  the 
mark,  and  is  called  2>^rva~va^  sesa-vat,  or  sdmdnyato-dristam.  Piirva-vat 
means  that  which  contains  as  the  mark  the  antecedent,  that  is,  the  cause. 
$  'sa-vat  means  that  which  contains  as  the  mark  the  consequent,  that  is,  the 
effect.  Sdmdnyato-dristam  means  that  which  contains  as  the  mark  some 
thing  other  than  a  cause  or  an  effect.  The  author  explains  these  forms 
of  inference,  which  have  been  also  explained  in  the  aphorisms  of  Gau 
tama  (i.e.,  the  Nydya-S&tram).1  Asya  idam  karyyam'  ;<Asya,'  of  this,  i.  «., 
of  the  sddhija  or  that  which  is  to  be  proved,  '  idam,'  this  the  sddhana  or 
that  which  will  prove  the  sddhya,  is  'karyyam/  i.e.,  the  effect  —  where  such 
usage  arises,  there  it  is  the  case  of  inference  by  means  of  an  effect  as 
the  inferential  mark.  e.  </.,  the  inference  of  fire  and  the  like,  by  the 
mark  of  the  smoke  and  the  like  '  Asya  idam  karanam  '  :  that  is  infer 
ence  of  which  the  mark  is  a  cause  is  as,  e.  </.,  the  inference  of  a  shower 
by  means  of  a  particular  ascent  of  clouds.  Sdmdnyato-dristam  or  that 
which  appears  in  the  form  of  that  of  which  the  inferential  mark  is 
something  other  than  a  cause  or  an  effect,  is  manifold  ;  as,  for  example, 
the  inference  of  the  iron  ring  as  being  in  conjunction  with  the  mortar 
and  the  like,  by  means  of  the  mark  of  a  particular  pestle  which  is 
conjoint  with  the  iron  ring  (at  its  end)  ;  so  also  is  the  inference  of  an 
ichneumon  concealed  behind  bushes  and  the  like,  by  the  sight  of  a 
particular  excited  snake  which  is  the  enemy  of  the  ichneumon  ;  and 
also  the  inference  of  fire  and  the  like  (as  existing)  in  a  frying  pan  and 
the  like,  by  means  of  the  hot  touch  combining  in  fire,  in  the  form  of  the 
counter-opposite  of  combination  favourable  to  fire. 

Inference  and  the  Law  of  Cause  and  Effect,  how  related. 

(Jpaskdra.  —  It  may  be  objected  that  this  enumeration  (of  marks)  is  inadequate,  since  it 
floes  not  include  the  inference  of  the  heaving  of  the  ocean  from  the  rising  of  tho  moon,  of  the 
rise  of  Canopus  (a  bright  star  in  the  southern  constellation  Argo  navis)  from  the  tranquility 
-or  clearness  of  the  waters  of  the  rising  of  tho  moon  from  the  expansion  of  the  Nymphaja,  of 
the  sotting  of  the  fourteen  lunar  mansions  or  naksatras  from  the  rising  of  the  other  fourteen, 
of  colour  from  taste,  or  of  a  particular  taste  from  a  particular  colour. 


II  &  I  ^  I  R  It 

Asya,  its,  to  it.  ^  Idam,  it.  ^T^WH^^f^?*:  Karyya-karaua-sam- 
•bandhah,  (The  suggestion  or  introduction  of  the  relation  of    effect    and 


280  VAI£E§IKA  PHILOSOPHY 


cause.)  ^  Cha,    and,    whereas.  SRT^n^  Avayavut,  from  a    member  of  the- 
argument  or  syllogism,  vr^fr    Bhavati,  arises. 

2.  l  It  is  its  '  (  —  this  cognition  is  sufficient  to  cause  an  illation 
to  be  made)  ;  whereas  (the  introduction  of)  the  relation  of  effect 
and  cause  arises  from  a  (particular)  member  (of  the  argument). 
—  343. 

In  anticipation  of  this  objection,  he  says. 

'  It  is  its  '  —  'this  much  only  becomes  the  instrument  of  illation. 
'  Asya/  i.  e.,  of  the  means  of  illation,  e.  g.,  smoke,  etc.,  '  idam/  i.  e.,  (it 
is)  that  which  is  to  be  established,  e.  </.,  fire,  etc.  ;  or,  l  asya/  I.  e.,  of  the 
pervader,  e.  g.,  fire,  etc.,  '  idam,'  i.  e.,  (it  is)  that  which  can  be  pervaded,. 
e.  jr.,  smoke,  etc.  It  is,  therefore,  only  the  apprehension  of  the  being 
that  which  can  be  pervaded,  that  governs  (the  process  of  illation),  and 
not  also  the  relation  of  effect  and  cause,  etc.  Lest  it  might  be  objected 
that  the  enumeration  (of  marks  of  inference)  in  the  preceding  aphorism 
is  consequently  futile,  he  adds  '  the  relation  of  effect  and  cause.'  Other 
relation  (i.  e.,  of  the  conjunct,  the  contradictory,  and  the  combined), 
mentioned  above,  are  also  hereby  implied.  In  the  word  l  relation/ 
there  is  the  tropical  suggestion  of  that  in  which  relation  is  the  thing 
contained.  '  Relation  '  accordingly  means  the  introduction  or  talk  of 
relation.  Whence  does  the  introduction  or  talk  or  relation  arise  '?  He 
gives  the  reply  by  saying  'avayavat,  i.  <>.,  from  a  part  or  member  (of  the 
argument),  that  is  to  say,  only  from  the  uddharana  or  example  or  illus 
tration.  The  fifth  case-ending  or  the  ablative  inflection  (HI  'avayavat  '} 
bearsithe  sense  of  the  infinite.  The  meaning,  therefore,  is  that,  in  this 
Darsana  or  philosophy  as  well  as  in  the  Samkhya  and  other  Darsanas 
the  introduction  of  the  relation  of  effect  and  cause,  etc.,  has  been  made 
in  conformity  with,  or  regard  being  had  to,  the  uddliarana  or  illustra 
tion  (q.  v.}  further  below). 

Thus,  then,  vydpyatva,  the  being  that  which  can  be  pervaded  (as  the- 
mark,  by  that  of  which  it  is  the  mark)  denotes  the  possession  of  a 
natural  connection,  the  natural  being  that  which  is  not  accidental  or 
adventitious.  This  quality  of  being  non-accidental  is  in  the  case 
of  perceptive  object,  known  simply  from  its  being  ascertained,  in  some 
cases  that  they  do  not  pervade  (or  are  not  invariably  concomitant  with) 
that  which  is  to  be  proved  (or  that  which  is  denoted  by  the  major  term), 
and  from  the  certainty,  in  other  cases  that  they  pervade  the  instru 
ment  of  inference  or  inferential  mark.  Of  supersensible  objects  esta 
blished  by  proof,  some  are  pervasive  of  both  (that  which  is  to  be  proved, 
and  the  instrument  of  inference),  or  non-pervasive  only  of  the  instru 
ment  of  inference,  or  non-pervasive  only  of  that  which  is  to  be  proved. 
Amongst  these,  the  quality  of  being  non-accidental  is  to  be  ascertained, 
in  the  first  case,  from  their  being  pervasive  of  the  instrument  of  infer 
ence  ;  in  the  second  case,  from  their  being  non-pervasive  of  that  which 
is  to  be  proved  ;  and  in  the  fourth  case  also,  from  their  being  pervasive 
of  the  instrument  of  inference.  In  the  third  case  also,  there  being  room 
for  the  further  inquiry  that  while  it  is  not  possible  or  proved  why  that 
which  pervades,  should  pervade  only  this  much  (t.  e.,  the  instrument  of 
inference)  and  not  more,  how  it  is  at  the  same  time  possible  for  that 


KANlDA  SOTRAS  IX,  2,  2.  281 

which  does  not  pervade,  to  pervade  even  so  much  (i.  e.,  the  instrument 
of  inference),  and  thus  acquisition  and  preservation  (or  loss  and 
gain)  being  counter-balanced,  and  from  other  considerations,  the 
quality  of  being  non-accidental  should  be  determined.  The  attitude 
of  mind  that  the  demon  of  apprehension  that  some  upddhi,  accident, 
adjunct,  or  external  condition,  may  exist  is  these  cases,  attacks 
all  rules  of  conduct,  prescriptive  and  prohibitive,  should  be 
rejected,  inasmuch  as  there  is  possibility  of  certainty  of  non-accidental 
nature.  The  definitions  of  upddhi  nnd  vydpti  (pervasion)  have  been 
already  stated. 

This  inference  is  of  two  kinds  self-satisfying  or  logical,  and  other- 
satisfying  or  rhetorical.  Therein  inference  for  the  sake  of ,  or  origina 
ting  from,  oneself,  arises  from  the  investigation  by  a  person  himself 
of  vydpti,  pervasion  or  universal  concomitance  of  the  major  and  middle 
terms,  and  paksadharmatd,  the  being  a  property  or  characteristic  of 
the  minor  term  or  the  existence  of  the  middle  in  the  minor  term  ;  and 
inference  for  the  sake  of,  or  originating  from,  another,  results  from  the 
knowledge  of  vydpti  and  paksadharmatd  produced  from  an  argument 
(nydya,')  enunciated  by  another. 

A  nydya  argument  or  syllogism  is  a  proposition  productive  of 
verbal  cognition  which  leads  to  the  recognition  or  sub-sumption  of  the 
mark  of  illation  in  the  third  member  of  the  syllogism.  The  members 
thereof  are  five  ;  and  membership  here  denotes  the  being  a  proposition 
productive  of  verbal  cognition,  which  again  is  productive  of  another 
verbal  cognition  leading  to  the  recognition  or  sub-surnption  of  the  infer 
ential  mark  in  the  third  member.  Such  propositions  are  :  pratijnd, 
enunciation  ;  hetu,  mark  or  reason  ;  uddharana,  illustration  ;  upanaya, 
application,  ratiocination,  or  deduction  ;  and  nigamana,  conclusion.  Of 
these  the  pratijnd,  enunciation,  is  aproposition  which  is  a  member  of  the 
argument  or  syllogism,  conveying  verbal  cognition  the  object  whereof 
is  neither  less  nor  greater  than  that  of  the  inferential  cognition  desired  ; 
the  hetu,  mark  or  reason,  is  that  member  of  the  syllogism,  ending  with 
the  ablative  inflection,  which  is  applied  to  the  instrument  of  inference 
or  the  middle  term  under  consideration  ;  the  uddharana,  illustration,  is 
that  member  of  the  syllogism  which  is  declaratory  or  demonstrative  of 
the  inseparable  existence  of  the  given  major  and  middle  terms  ;  the 
upanaya,  application  or  deduction,  is  that  member  of  the  syllogism 
which  establishes  that  the  hetu  which  is  so  distinguished  by  the  posses 
sion  of  inseparable  existence,  is  a  distinguishing  characteristic  or  con 
tent  of  the  paksa,  the  subject  of  the  conclusion,  %.  e.}  the  minor  term  ; 
and  the  nigamaua,  conclusion,  is  that  member  of  the  syllogism  which 
declares  that  the  object  denoted  by  the  given  major  term  is  a  distin 
guishing  characteristic  or  content  of  the  paksa.  Thus  the  syllogism 
proceeds  as  follows  : — 

Sound  is  non-eternal, — pratijfid, 

Because  it  is  an  effect, — hetu. 

Whatever  is  an  effect  or  producible  is  non-eternal, — uddharana, 

It  (sound)   possesses   effectness   or   producibility  pervaded  by 

non-eternality, — upanaya. 


282  VAlSESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

Therefore,  (it  is)  non-eternal,  —  nigamana. 

The  significant  appellations  given  by  the'l  Vaifesikas  to  these  very 
members  are  pratijnd  (enunciation  of  that  which  is  to  be  proved), 
apadesa  (reason),  nidarsana  (instance),  anusandhdna  (investigation), 
and  pratydmndya  (re-stateraent  of  the  pratijnd').  In  this  connection, 
the  mode  of  the  application  of  vdda,  theory  or  discourse,  jalpa,  disputa 
tion  or  demolition  of  the  argument  of  the  opponent  and  establishment 
of  one's  own  theory,  and  vitandd,  controversion  or  only  destructive 
criticism,  and  the  characteristics  of  chhala,  misconstruction,  jdti,  futile 
or  adverse  reply,  and  nigraha-sthdna,  ground  of  defeat,  ^.  e.,  misapplica 
tion  or  non-application  of  the  argument  advanced,  may  be  sought  in 
the  Vddi-vinoda.  —  2. 

Inferential  Cognition  includes  Verbal  Cognition. 

U"paskdra.—With  the  purpose  of  including  other  forma  of  proof  into  (the  {inferential,    ho 
commences  another  topic. 


Etena,  hereby.   STT*^    Sabdam,     verbal.     sqT93TrTO(    Vyakhyatam, 
explained. 

3.     Hereby  verbal  (cognition  is)  explained.  —  344. 

This  cognition  is  '  Sabdam  '  (verbal),  produced  by  the  instrument 
ality  of  sound  or  word  —  this  doctrine,  maintained  by  the  Nydya  school, 
is  also,  '  vydkhydtam,'  explained,  '  etena  '  (by  this),  by  the  characteris 
tic  of  being  inferential,  that  is  to  say,  simply  as  being  produced  from 
marks  (of  inference).  As  inferential  cognition  depends  upon  vydpti, 
pervasion,  paksadharmatd,  the  existence  of  the  middle  in  the  minor 
term,  and  recollection,  so  does  verbal  cognition  also.  Thus,  e.  </.,  "These 
objects  denoted  words,  or  meanings  of  words,  are  mutually  connected, 
since  they  are  represented  in  memory  by  words  possessing  expectancy 
for,  or  dependence  upon,  one  another,  etc.,  as  are  the  meanings  of  words 
in  l  Drive  away  the  cow.'  "  Here  it  is  by  observing  or  apprehending  the 
characteristic  of  being  represented  in,  or  called  to,  memory  by  a 
number  of  words  possessing  expectancy  for,  or  dependence  upon,  one 
another,  which  characteristic  is  pervaded  by  the  possession  of  mutual 
connection  by  these  meanings  of,  or  objects  denoted  by,  those  words, 
that  one  infers  the  possession  of  connection.  What  then  is  the  use  of 
the  supposition  of  sound  or  word  or  language  as  a  form  of  proof  ? 

Objection.  —  There  can  be  no  inference  in  cognition  produced  by 
words,  inasmuch  as  such  inference  fails  where  the  words  are  spoken  by 
an  untrustworthy  person,  e.  g.,  that  there  are  fivs  fruits  on  the  river 
bank. 

Answer.  —  The  objection  does  not  arise,  as  the  words  must  have 
the  qualification  of  coining  from  the  mouth  of  an  dpta  or  trustworthy 
person.  For  trustworthiness  denotes  the  possession  of  knowledge  of 
the  meaning  of  the  statement  corresponding  to  objective  reality  within 
the  reach  of  the  meaning  of  the  given  statement,  and  not  merely  that 
a  person  is  not  a  deceiver. 


KAWADA  StiTRAS  IX,  2,  3.  283 

Objection. — But  this  is  hard  to  apprehend,  prior  to  the  intuition 
of  the  meaning  of  the  statement. 

Answer. — Not  so,    for    even    those  who  hold  the  theory  of  the  autho 
ritativeness  of  word  or     language,    admit    the    apprehensibility    of   the 
quality    of    being    spoken    by    a    trustworthy    person,    which    serves  to 
differentiate  fallible  or  false  language. 

Objection — They  depend  upon  that  (i.  e.,  the  quality  of  being 
spoken  by  a  trustworthy  person)  for  the  apprehension  of  authoritative- 
ness,  whereas  verbal  cognition  is  produced  even  without  the  apprehen 
sion  of  that  quality.  In  your  case  also  the  apprehension  or  inference 
must  needs  be  in  accordance  with  nature  of  the  inferential  mark.  And 
that  which  is  pervaded  (i.  e.,  the  middle  term),  is  qualified  with  the 
possession  of  the  quality  of  being  spoken  by  a  trustworthy  person. 

Answer. — The  objection  is  not  successful,  since  it  is  possible  to 
have  such  general  apprehension  as  "  He  is  here  infallible." 

Objection — But  the  term  '  here  '  ultimately  means  the  same  thing 
as  the  term  'the  connection  under  consideration/  So  that  to  apprehend 
that  (i.  e.,  the  quality  of  being  spoken  by  a  trustworthy  person),  previ 
ously,  is  simply  impossible. 

Ansict'r. — It  is  not,  in  consequence  of  the  possibility  of  ascertain 
ment  of  the  inferential  mark  by  means  of  the  possibility  of  ascertain 
ment  in  a  general  way  of  the  quality  of  being  spoken  by  a  trustworthy 
person,  from  the  force  of  association  with  the  topic  and  other  circum 
stances.  If  even  then  discrepancy  sometimes  appears  the  inferential 
process  proceeds  as  by  the  property  of  smoke  (mistaken)  in  vapour,  etc. 

Objection. — What  is  in  this  case  the  vddhya  or  the  major  term  ?  Is 
it  that  the  meanings  of  words  are  in  fact  connected,  or  that  their 
connection  is  something  possible  ?  It  cannot  be  the  first,  as  it  is  not 
the  case  with  the  statement  of  an  untrustworthy  person.  Nor  can  it 
be  the  second,  for,  even  though  mere  connectibility  or  coherence  of 
words  be  proved,  still  inference  cannot  proceed  unshaken,  in  conse 
quence  of  the  uncertainty  of  actual  connection.  Moreover,  coherence 
being  previously  known  as  the  qualification  of  the  inferential  mark, 
what  is  the  use  of  inference  ? 

Answer. — This  is  not  a  valid  objection,  inasmuch  as  it  is  the  gene 
ral  proposition  or  uniformity  which  is  the  addhya  or  the  thing  to  be 
proved,  and,  there  can  be  no  violation  of  the  rule  in  consequence  of 
the  qualification,  as  has  been  already  stated,  by  the  characteristic  of 
being  spoken  by  a  trustworthy  person. 

Objection. — Expectancy  or  interdependence  of  the  words  of  a  sen 
tence  is  equivalent  to  antecedent  non-existence  in  the  hearer  of  the 
cognition  of  connection  (of  the  meanings  of  words)  producible  by  it.  It 
is  only  so  long  as  it  exists  as  such  that  it  can  be  the  inferential  mark. 
The  futility  of  inference  (in  verbal  cognition),  therefore,  follows  from 
this  that  in  order  to  the  cognition  of  expectancy,  the  cognition  of  con 
nection  must  take  place  beforehand,  and  not  at  any  other  time. 


284  VAlgESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

Answer. — This  is  not  the  case,  for  we  do  not  say  that  expectancy 
is  merely  antecedent  non-existence  of  the  eognition  of  connection.  On 
the  other  hand,  expectancy  is  distinguished  with  the  possession  of 
inseparable  existence  or  universal  agreement  of  what  is  presented  to 
consciousness  by  the  words  and  what  is  represented  in  memory,  as  it  is 
from  the  cognition  of  this  adjective  element  that  the  cognition  of 
expectancy  results. 

Objection. — Let  then  'inseparable  existence  itself  constitute  ex 
pectancy. 

Answer. — By  no  means.  For,  "  The  water  of  the  river  is  pure," 
"  The  buffalo  grazes  in  the  basin  of  the  river  " — in  these  cases  also  it 
would  entail  the  consciousness  of  the  connection  of  the  river  and  the 
basin  by  means  of  their  inseparable  existence  in  the  form  of  the  cogni 
tion  that  the  buffalo  grazes  in  the  basin  of  the  river  of  pure  water. 
And  in  such  instances  as  "  The  water-lily  is  blue,"  in  the  presence  of 
inseparable  existence  of  the  water-lily  and  blueness  even  in  particular 
cases,  would  make  the  inseparable  existence  of  the  substance  and 
attribute  presented  to  consciousness  by  the  words,  possible  (that  is,  that 
all  water-liles  were  blue.) 

Or,  it  may  be  that  expectancy  is  nothing  but  the  desire  to  know 
or  enquiry  with  reference  to  the  object  recalled  by  words,  or  that  it  is 
the  complement  of  the  connotation.  Still  the  cognition  of  it  is  neces 
sary,  inasmuch  as  in  a  cause  which  is  being  known,  there  must  appear 
divergence  in  characteristic  from  what  is  not  a  cause,  appro 
priate  to  such  cognition,  as  is  the  case  with  pervasion  or  univer 
sal  concomitance.  It  is  for  the  very  same  reason,  whether 
connectibility  or  coherence  of  the  words  of  a  sentence  mean 
the  absence  of  certainty  of  non-agreement,  or  the  non-existence  of 
contradictory  evidence,  or  the  observation  of  agreement  with  similar 
other  words,  or  that  in  the  connection  of  the  meaning  of  the  one 
word  (e.</.,  fire)  with  that  of  another  (e.g..  wets),  there  exists  as  something 
contained  therein,  certain  knowledge  that  the  one  (e.  </.,  fire)  is  not 
the  counter-opposite  of  absolute  non-existence  inherent  in  the  other 
(e.  y.j  wetsj,  that  cognition  of  coherence  is  necessary.  Cognition  of 
adjacency  of  the  words  of  a  sentence,  in  the  form  of  recollection 
without  interval  of  the  objects  denoted  by  them,  is  also  a  condition. 
It  may  be  that  differences  or  peculiarities  of  connection  of  words  result 
only  from  the  peculiarities  of  differences  of  the  words  which  are  going 
to  be  connected  ;  and  the  proof  of  the  peculiarity  or  difference  in  this 
way,  is  not  undesired.  Or,  the  desired  peculiarity  may  be  proved  by 
the  characteristic  of  its  so  determining  cognition,  inasmuch  as  the 
inference  takes  place  that  these  words,  being  a  collection  of  words 
possessing  expectancy,  co-herence,  and  adjacency,  are  preceded  by,  or 
liave  for  their  antecedent,  cognition  of  the  connection  of  the  ideas  or 
mailings  represented  in  memory,  as  is  the  case  with  the  group  of  the 
words  "  Drive  away  the  cow."  The  opposition  that  the  sddhya  or  thing 
to  be  proved  is  that  these  words  have  the  connection  of  the  meanings 
recalled,  and  that  the  possession  by  words  of  connection  with  the 
meanings  of  those  words,  is  impeded,  is  better  left  unnoticed.  Nor  is 
it  the  being  expressive  of,  or  the  means  of  making  known,  connection,  by 


KANADA  StiTRAS  IX,  2,  3.  285 

being  the  inferential  mark,  that  is  the  possession  of  connection  by  the 
words,  since  the  mark  not  being  proved  to  exist  prior  to  the  inference, 
there  can  be  no  apprehension  or  cognition  of  the  peryasion  thereof. 

Some  say  that  expressive  movement  or  gesture  is  a  new  form  of 
proof.  To  this  it  is  replied:  Gesture  is  of  two  kinds,  conventional,  and 
non-con-ventional.  Therein  that  which  is  conventional,  calls  back  to 
mind  the  sound  or  word  lying  in  the  understanding  or  intent  or  com 
mon  consent,  but  does  not  also  produce  certain  cognition  of  connection 
(between  gesture  and  its  significance),  as  letters  do.  It  is  sound  or  word, 
rising  up  in  memory,  that  is  the  means  of  proof  there,  and  it  has  been 
.already  declared  that  the  chracteristic  of  being  a  mark  of  illation 
belongs  to  sound  or  word.  Nor  is  recollection  of  the  word  a  collateral 
or  secondary  function  of  gesture,  inasmuch  as,  in  order  to  exercise 
-such  function,  gesture  would  have  to  be  uniformly  present  in  all 
cases,,  whereas  there  takes  place  intuition  of  meanings  from  words  even 
without  the  intervention  of  gesture. 

Objection. — This  being  so,  how  does  the  conduct  of  a  deaf  person 
come  to  depend  upon,  or  spring  from,  gesture  ?  For,  it  is  impossible  for 
him  to  have  knowledge  of  the  convention  in  a  given  instance. 

Answer. — The  objection  cannot  prevail,  for  it  is  to  be  considered 
how  he  derives  certain  knowledge  of  the  meaning  or  idea  even,  from 
gesture,  when  it  is  impossible  for  him  to  grasp  the  sense  or  connection 
of  the  meaning  or  idea  also.  His  conduct,  again,  springs  from  the 
apprehension  of  inseparable  existence  (or  serviceable  associated  (habit), 
in  the  same  way  as  particular  adaptations  of  conduct  are  possible  in 
the  case  of  the  elephant  and  the  horse  in  accordance  with  the  pricks  of 
the  goad  and  strokes  of  the  whip. 

On  the  other  hand,  non-conventional  gesture, — that  kind  of  it 
which,  further,  is  in  agreement  or  association  with  action, — causes 
.-activity  in  the  employee  by  reminding  him  of  the  intention  of  the 
-employer,  but  does  not  produce  sure  cognition  in  any  case.  For  example, 
as  according  to  the  instruction  "  You  should  come  on  the  blowing  of 
"the  conch-shell/'  the  man  turns  up  on  hearing  the  blowing  of  the 
.conch-shell,  so  a  man  strikes  another  at  the  proper  time-  according  to 
the  pre-ordination  "  You  should  strike  him  when  I  shall  raise  my 
forefinger,"  but  this  does  not  prove  anything.  Non-conventional 
gesture,  again,  which  is  in  agreement  with  cognition,  is  either  pro 
minent  on  its  subjective  side,  as  in  "  By  the  raising  of  the  ten  fingers, 
it  should  be  understood  by  you  that  the  number  of  coins,  (or  contor 
tions  of  the  limbs  in  ascetic  posture),  or  of  the  purdnas  is  ten  ;  "  or  it 
is  prominent  on  its  verb  or  predicate  side,  as  in  "  You  should  come  up, 
after  seeing  contraction  of  the  hand."  Thus,  by  this  form  of  gesture 
the  meanings  of  words  are  no  doubt  recalled,  but  only  severally  or 
•each  independently  of  the  rest  ;  but  their  mutual  association  or  con 
nection  also  is  not  illuminated  by  it,  as  it  is  by  nominative,  objective, 
And  other  case-endings  which  explain  that  inter-relation,  inasmuch  as 
in  the  case  under  consideration,  invariable  or  constant  components  of 
.gesture  do  not  exist. 

Objection. — How  do  then  activity  and  inactivity  proceed  from 
gesture  in  the  absence  of  cognition  of  connection  ? 


286  VAlgESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

Answer.—  Yon  may  take  it  that  these  follow  from  either  the  one  or 
the  other  of  doubt  or  uncertainty  amd  pratibhd  or  inventive  genius  or 
instinct.  Gesture  also  is,  therefore,  no  proof.  _  3. 

Sound  or  word  cannot    produce  cognition  of  its  sense  or  meaning. 

UpasMra.—li  may  be  »Bked,  how  sound  (or  word)  conld  be  a  mark  of  illation,  when- 
its  difference  from  the  nmrk  appear*  from  its  posting  the  nature  of  an  apadeia  or  I 
description.  Anticipating  this,  he  says  : 


\g:    Hetuh,      reason.     *jq^:     Apadesah,    description.     Sound, 
Lingam,   mark.     JWWT    Prainanarn,    proof,    ^    Karanam,    instrument. 
fftr  Hi,  these.     fR*rf??R3(  An-artha-antaram,  not  different  things. 

4.  Reason,  Description,  Mark,  Proof,  Instrument—  these  are 
not  antonyms.  —  345. 

'  Apadesah  '  means  sound  (or  word),  according  to  its  derivation 
that  by  it  objects  are  referred  to,  i.  e.,  affirmed  or  described.  And  it  is 
really  a  synonym  of  hetu,  reason,  and  linya,  mark.  'Pramanam'  means  the 
instrument  of  true  cognition  in  the  manner  of  the  inferential  mark.  In 
like  manner,  the  word  '  karanam  '  also  is  equivalent  to  the  mark  itself 
which  is  the  instrument  (karana)  of  inferntial  cognition.  For  the 
operation  of  karana  or  the  instrument  is  two-fold  :  Some  karana 
operates  or  exercises  its  function  under  ur  subject  to  contact  or  conti 
guity,  and  some  karana  exercises  its  function  on  the  strength  of  inse 
parable  existence.  Sound  (or  word;,  on  the  contrary,  has  neither 
contact  nor  inseperable  existence  with  the  object  or  meaning  ;  htmee,. 
how  can  it  lead  to  the  object  ? 

Objection.—  -It  leads  to  the  object  with  the  help  of  arbitrament  or 
according  to  direction. 

Anawer.—It  cannot  do  so,  for  arbitrament  or  direction  is  with. 
reference  to  the  meaning  of  words,  and  not  to  their  connection. 

Objection^-  There  may  be  arbitrament  or  direction  with  reference 
to  that  also. 

Answer.—  No  for  that  connection  being  of  a  manifold  nature  it  is 
impossible  that  ,t  could  be  the  object  of  reference  by  arbitrament  Or 
QI  recti  on. 

O^zon.-But  it  iB'from  the    force  of    arbitrament   or  direction  in 
e°afni&0t:dS    ^  ^"^  ^  ^  ™^  ^  a  ^^nce  also 

Answer.—  This  i    is  not    the  case,  as  there    would  be  then  over  extei 
sion  or  undue  application    of   the    principle,    if    something    is    oroughV 
thing  else!'*'  "P     7  arbltrameilt  or  directjo"    with  regard  to  some- 

fT,ia  0^c**?»-r-IfY*riB,l)le    antecedei^e  or    pervasion  of  connection  in, 
this  case  will  be  that  of  connection  as  recalled  by  sound. 


KANADA  8CTRA8  IX,/2,  5.  287 


Answer. — If  it  be  so,  then,  by  that  admission,  inference  itself  finds 
admittance  on  the  strength  of  invariable  antecedence  or  pervasion. 
Arbitrament  or  direction  also,  if  it  implied  mere  intention  or  desire, 
would  be  unduly  applied  or  too  wide. 

Objection. — -But  the  desire  of  tsvara,  G-od,  cannot  be  said  to  be  too 
^vide. 

Answer. — Yes,  it  may  be  so,  inasmuch  as  even  in  the  absence  of 
divine  will,  the  words,  river  or  Ganga  (Ganges),  etc.,  suggest  or  call  up 
the  ideas  of  the  bank,  etc. 

This  is  enough  of  over-forwardness  in  a  logician. — 4. 
Comparison,  Presumption,  Sub-sumption,  Privation,  and  Tradition 
are  all  included  in  Inference. 

UpaskAra. — For  the  purpose  of  showing  that  comparison,  etc.,  also,  recognised  of  others 
(as  so  many  independent  means  of  proof)  and  which  proceed  on  the  strength  of  inseparable 
•existence  or  universal  concomitance,  are  merely  different  forms  of  inferential  cognition,  he 
.says  : 


Asya,  its.  f^*  Idam,  it.  fft   Iti,  such.  This.    ^MMRidrMl^  Buddhi- 
Apeksitevut,  because  of  the  cognition  or  notion  being  needed. 

5.  (Comparison,  Presumption,  Sab-sumption,  Privation,  and 
Tradition  are  all  included  in  Inference  by  marks),  because  they 
depend,  for  their  origin,  upon  the  cognition,  namely,  "  It  is  its." 
— 346. 

The  words  "  of  comparison,  presumption,  comprehension  or  sub- 
sumption  and  privation  "  complete  the  aphorism.  '  Asya,'  of  the  per- 
vader,  i  idam  '  (it  is)  the  pervaded, — the  cognition  is  in  this  form.  The}'- 
are  dependent  upon  it,  by  which  it  is  depended  upon  as  their  originator. 
•<  Buddhi-apeksitatva  '  means  the  state  of  being  so  dependent.  In 
consequence  of  such  dependence, — -this  is  the  meaning  of  the  term,  it 
being  a  relative  compound  formed  similarly  to  dhita-dgnih  (by  whom 
fire  has  been  deposited),  or  formed  with  the  affix  ita  (which  signifies 
that  something,  e.g.,  dependence  upon  the  cognition,  has  been  produced 
in  the  something  else,  e.  y.,  comparison,  etc.),  according  to  the  rule  that 
it  is  applied  to  the  words  star,  etc.,  (so  that  tdrakd  +  ita  =  tdrakita  = 
starry,  heaven). 

Upamdna,  comparison  or  analogy,  is  in  every  respect  nothing  but 
<inumdna,  or  inference,  by  means  of  words.  Now  the  sentence,  "  A 
gavaeus  or  gayal  looks  like  a  cow,"  is  spoken  by  a  forester  in  reply  to 
-the  enquiry  by  a  twonsman,  viz.,  "  What  does  a  gayal  look  like  to  ?  " 
Here  immediately  after  hearing  the  above  sentence  at  distant  place, 
"the  townsman  determines  the  meaning  of  the  name,  gayal,  of  the 
strength  of  the  community  of  substratum,  namely  that  which  is  like  a 
cow  is  the  object  of  reference  by,  or  designate  of,  the  word,  gayal. 
Then  when  ho  goes  to  the  forest  and  meets  an  animal  body  of  that  des 
cription,  he  recognises  that  that  is  that  which  is  the  designate  of  the 
•word,  gayal. 


288  VAI£E§IKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

Objection. — At  the  time  of  hearing  the  sentence  at  a  distant  placer 
the  generic  nature  of  the  gayal,  which  is  condition  or  occasion  of  the 
recognition  or  application  of  the  name,  is  not  known.  How  then  can 
there  be  such  determination  by,  or  application  of,  the  name  '? 

Answer. — There  can  be  such  determination,  as  the  cognition  there 
of  (i.  e.,  of  the  generic  nature)  is  possible  by  means  of  suggestion  or 
metaphorically. 

Objection. — But  where  is  the  room  for  suggestion,  when  in  the 
sentence,  "  A  gayal  looks  like  a  cow/'  there  is  no  want  of  proof  of  the 
agreement  or  positionjof  the  subject  and  predicate  ? 

Answer. — There  is  room  for  suggestion,  inasmuch  as  complete  equi 
valence  of  the  two  terms  still  remains  to  be  proved.  For  it  is  not 
proper  to  hold  up  before  one,  who  desires  to  be  enlightened  Tn  the 
matter,  likeness  to  a  cow  as  the  condition  or  occasion  of  partial  appli 
cation  of  the  name.  Therefore,  it  (the  name)  refers  to  a  particular 
genus  or  class  in  its  entirety.  Hence  arises  the  possibility  of  sugges 
tion.  Or,  the  word,  gayal,  is  denotative  of  the  animal,  gayal,  being 
applied  thereto  by  the  elect,  and  there  existing  no  other  application 
of  it.  Other  applications  being  non-existent,  whatever  word  is  applied 
by  the  elect  to  a  certain  object,  the  same  is  denotative  of  that,  as  the- 
word,  cow,  is  of  the  cow.  It  is  from  this  inference  that  the  application 
of  the  name,  gayal,  comes  to  be  determined. 

And  the  reasoning  which  you  may  set  forth  as  being  auxiliary  to 
upamdna,  comparison,  would  better  go  with  anumdna,  inference,  which 
has  been  established  as  a  method  of  proof.  What  is  the  use  of  upamdna 
which,  as  a  method  of  proof,  is  yet  to  be  supposed  ? 

More  detailed  consideration  on  this  subject  may  be  sought  in  the 
Anum  Ana-May  tikha. 

Arthdpattiy  Presumption  or  Explanation,  also  is  nothing  but  infer 
ence.  Thus,  (1)  presumption  from  the  observed,  arises  where  by  means 
of  the  non-existence  of  Chaitra  who  is  living,  in  the  house,  ascertained 
by  stronger  evidence,  (e.  g.,  perception),  his  existence  outside  it  is 
presumed.  Here  the  cognition  of  Chaitra's  existence  outside  the  house 
is  wholly  dependent  upon  the  ascertainment  of  the  relation  of  the 
pervader  between  the  demonstrable  and  the  demonstrator.  For,  as  a 
matter  of  fact,  the  non-existence  of  a  living  person  in  the  house  is 
accompanied  with  this  existence  outside  it,  or  there  arises  the  cogni 
tion  that  the  non-existence  of  a  living  person  in  the  house  is  impossible 
without  his  existence  outside  it.  In  the  first  case,  there  is  apprehen 
sion  of  positive  pervasion  or  concomitance,  and,  in  the  last,  of  negative- 
pervasion. 

Objection. — Pervasion  does  exist,  but  the  apprehension  thereof  does- 
Hot  here  take  place. 

Answer. — Were  this  the  case,  then,  in  the  absence  of  the 
apprehension  of  pervasion,  there  would  be  no  scope  or  occasion  for  the- 
manifestation  of  presumption,  and  there  would  consequently  be  sup 
position  of  only  that  which,  as  an  entity,  would  demonstrate  pervasion 
existing  in  its  proper  form  or  as  such.  This  is  the  direction  or  point. 


K ANiDA  StiTR AS  IX,  2,  5.  289 


The  inclusion  of  presumption  due  to  the  instrumentality  of  doubt 
or  uncertainty  as  well  as  of  that  due  to  the  instrumentality  contra 
diction  or  contrast  or  opposition,  in  inference,  should  be  also  under 
stood  or  inferred  ;  for  contrast  or  opposition,  characterised  as  unifor 
mity  of  non-co-existence,  also  is  constituted  by  pervasion  or  (negative) 
concomitance. 

(2)  Presumption  from  what  is  heard,  is  also  inference  by  means  of 
the  inferred.  "  Deva-datta,  who  is  stout,  does  not  eat  by  day" — By  this 
proposition,  stoutness  is  inferred,  and,  by  means  of  that  stoutness,  there 
takes  place  inference  of  eating  at  night  in  this  way  that  Deva-datta 
eats  at  night,  because,  as  he  does  not  eat  by  day,  stoutness  cannot 
otherwise  appear  in  him. 

fSamhhava,  Comprehension  or  Sub-sumption,  also  is  merely  a  form 
of  inference.  For,  the  examples  of  it  are  :  A  drona  (a  standard  measure)- 
does  nut  exceed  a  khdri  (one  khdri  =  4t  dronas)  ;  an  ddhaka  does  not 
exceed  a  drona  (one  drona  =  4i  ddhakas)  ;  a  hundred  does  not  not  exceed 
a  thousand  ;  etc.  Here  a  khdri  contains  a  drona,  being  constituted  by 
it.  One  thing  being  constituted  by  another  thing,  the  former  is 
possessed  of  the  latter  by  means  of  the  latter,  as  a  water-pot  is  possessed 
of  its  components.  Other  instances  should  be  similarly  understood. 
That  learning  is  probable  in  a  Brdhmana  (because  Brdhmanas  as  a  class 
are  learned),  that  valour  is  probable  in  a  Ksatriya  (because  Ksatriyas  as 
a  class  are  valiant),  etc.,  on  the  other  hand,  do  not  at  all  become  means 
of  proof,  inasmuch  as  they  do  not  produce  certainty. 

Abhdva,  Non-existence  or  Privation,  also  is  not  a  different  form  of 
evidence  ;  for,  being  similar  to  the  inference  of  the  cause  by  means  of 
the  effect,  the  inference  of  the  non-existence  of  the  cause  by  means  of 
the  non-existence  of  the  effect,  is  included  within  inference  itself,  as 
pervasion  or  universal  concomitance  is  the  ground  of  such  inference 
by  means  of  non-existence. 

The  Jthattas  (Prabhdkara  and  other  Mimdmsakas),  however,  maintain 
that  the  evidence  which  causes  the  apprehension  of  non-existence  in  the 
ground,  etc.,  (v.g-,  The  water-pot  does  not  exist  on  the  groundj,  is  called 
non  perception.  Now,  this  evidence  or  proof  is  in  some  cases  included  in 
perception,  and  in  other  cases,  inference,  inasmuch  as  non-existence  is 
apprehended  by  the  eye,  etc.,  themselves.  For,  it  cannot  be  said  that  the 
senses  are  exhausted  Justin  the  apprehension  of  the  substratum  (of 
non-existence,  e.  </.,  the  ground),  since  their  function  continues  up  to 
the  apprehension  of  non-existence. 

AitUiya,  Tradition,  is  a  succession  of  sayings  of  which  the  authors 
are  not  known.  Itiha — this  collection  of  expletives  appears  in  the 
narration  of  past  events.  The  state  of  being  such  narration  of  past  events 
is  called  aitihya,  traditional  saying.  If  it  is  not  impeded  in  its  meaning, 
then,  coining  under  the  class  of  verbal  cognition,  it  is  a  made  of 
inference.  For  example,  In  this  Banyan  tree  there  dwells  a  Yaksa 
There  is  a  Gaurt  (a  Buddhistic  Spirit)  in  the  madhttka  tree  (Bassia 
latifolia*)  etc.  Now,  if  the  traditional  sayings  come  from  the  mouth  of 
trustworthy  persons,  then  they  are  as  has  been  already  declared  ;  if 
they  do  not  come  from  the  mouth  of  trustworthy  persons,  then  they  are 
no  evidence  at  all. 


a90  VAI^ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

Accordingly  it  is  established  that  proof  or  evidence  is  of  two  kinds 
only,  perception  and  inference  __  5. 

Wvriti.—Sambhava  or  Probability  is  cognition  dependent  upon  a 
plurality  of  concomitances  ;  e.  g.,  learning  is  probable  in  a  Brdhmana  • 
a  hundred  is  probably  contained  in  a  thousand. 

Note.—  The  construction  put  by  Jayandrdyana  upon  the  word, 
Sambhava  is  explicitly  rejected  by  Sankara  Misra.  In  the  lexicon 
Medmi  also  we  find  that  the  meaning  of  the  word  is  Adheyasya 
ddhdrdnatiriktatvdm,  i.  e.,  the  state  of  what  is  contained  not  exceeding 
that  which  contains  it,  or,  simply,  the  relation  of  the  part  not  bein? 
greater  than  the  whole. 

Reminiscence,  how  produced. 

Upatkdra.—  Inferential    cognition    having    been    explained,    he    now    begini     another 
topic. 


Atma-manasot,  between  the  soul  and  the  mind. 
Samyoga-visesat,  from  a  particular  conjunction.  ^TRPj;  Samskarat, 
from  impression  or  retention  or  latency.  ^  Cha,  and.  *nfr:Sm  ritilj, 
Reminiscence. 

6.  Reminiscence  (results)  from  a  particular  conjunction 
between  the  Soul  and  the  Mind  and  also  from  Impression  or 
latency.  —  347. 

"  Results"--This  is  the  complement  of  the  aphorism.  '  Samyoga- 
vise^afc'  means  contact  or  contiguity  such  as  reflection  or  meditation  or 
inter-penetration,  etc.  From  this  as  the  non-combinative  cause,  in  the 
soul  as  the  combinative  cause,  <  Srnritifc/  (reminiscence),  a  particular 
kind  of  cognition  or  knowledge,  is  produced,  He  states  the 
efficient  cause  by  '  Samskarat.'  By  the  word  '  cha  '  he  implies  past 
experience  which  too  is  operative  here  as  the  object  recalled.  Re 
miniscence  or  recollection  imitates  the  correctness  of  the  previous 
experience,  such  alone  being  the  recollection  of  him  who  has  mistaken 
a  rope  for  a  snake  and  has  consequently  fled  from  it.  It  does  not, 
moreover,  follow  that  reminiscence  should  take  place  at  all  times  or 
continually,  einee  it  depends  on  the  resuscitation  of  the  mental  im 
pression.  Accordingly  it  has  been  said  by  the  revered  Prasastadeva, 
4<  Reminiscence,  caused  by  the  inferential  process  (as  in  inferring  fire 
from  smoke  there  is  recollection  of  the  universal  concomitance  of  fire 
and  smoke),  desire,  re-produetion  (or  suggestion  of  one  idea  by  an 
other),  and  aversion,  and  having  for  its  content  the  past,  among 
objects  seen,  heard,  and  otherwise  experienced,  (results)  from  a  parti 
cular  conjunction  between  the  soul  and  the  mind,  due  to  the  observa 
tion  of  a  suggestive  mark,  voluntary  attempt  at  recollection,  etc.,  and 
from  impression  or  latency  produced  by  intuitions  constantly  repeated 
vnd  attended  to  with  interest." 


KANADA  SCTRAS  IX,  2,  7.  291 


The  cognition  of  highly  advanced  sages,  or  their  intellectual 
intuition  has  not  been  separately  noticed  by  the  author  of  the  apho 
risms.  It  is  included  within  perception  by  Yogins  or  ascetics  (See  IX- 
ii.  13  below).  In  tho  treatise,  called  the  Paddrtha-Pradefa,  an  account  of 
it  has  been  given,  which  is  as  follows  :  •'  Prescient  or  inventive  cogni 
tion  which  is  produced  from  conjunction  between  the  soul  and  the 
mind,  and  also  from  a  particular  d/tarma,  virtue  or  merit,  independently 
of  inferential  marks,  etc.,  in  advanced  sages,  the  promulgators  of  the 
Vedas,  in  respect  of  objects,  supersensible,  or  past,  present,  arid  future, 
or  in  respect  of  dliarma,  etc.,  as  preserved  in  books,  —  that  is  called 
sagely  cognition.  "  This  form  of  cognition  at  times  arises  in  ordinary  or 
wordly  people  also  ;  as  when  a  young  maiden  says,  "  My  heart  assures 
me  my  brother  will  depart  to  morrow."  —  6- 

Dreamy  how   produced. 

Upankdra.  —  Thus  four-fold  vidyd,  or  true  cognition,  or  knowledge,  having  been 
explained,  it  now  becomes  proper  to  explain  \avidyd  or  false  cognition  or  knowledge. 
Therein  doubt  or  uncertainty  and  error  have  been  incidentally  ascertained  before.  For  the 
purpo.se  of  ascertaining  dreaming,  he  says  : 


H  S.  I  *  I  vs  || 

,    Tatha,  so.  ^Jf:  Svapnah,  dreaming. 
7.     So  (also  is)  dreaming.  —  348. 

The  meaning  is  that  as  reminiscence  results  from  a  particular  con 
junction  between  the  soul  and  the  mind,  and  from  impression  or  latency, 
so  also  does  cognition  in  dreaming.  Cognition  in  dreaming  is  the  mental 
experience,  through  the  channels  of  the  senses,  belonging  to  one,  when 
one's  senses  have  ceased  to  be  active  and  one's  mind  is  in  a  quiescent 
state.  And  this  is  of  three  kinds  (1)  It  partly  arises  from  acuteness  of 
impression  or  facility  of  reproductiveness  ;  as  in  a  man  who,  in  love  or 
in  auger,  thinks  intently  on  some  object,  when  he  goes  to  sleep,  in  that 
state,  cognition  resembling  perception,  in  the  form,  "  This  is  the  contest 
between  Karna  and  Arjuna  "  (two  heroes  of  the  Mahdbhdrdta),  is  pro 
duced,  through  the  influence  of  impression,  reproductiveness  or  latency, 
produced  by  previous  hearing  of  the  Purdiias,  etc.  (2)  It  arises  partly 
from  deran  gemeut  of  the  humours  or  affections  of  the  body,  viz.,  wind, 
bile,  and  phlegm.  Therein,  in  consequence  of  disorder  of  the  wind,  one 
dreams  of  moving  about  in  the  sky,  wandering  about  on  the  earth, 
fleeing  with  fear  from  tigers,  etc.,  and  the  like  ;  under  the  influence  of 
an  unwholesome  excess  of  the  bile,  one  dreams  of  entering  into  fire, 
embracing  flames  of  fire,  golden  mountains,  corruscations  of  flashing 
lightning,  sudden  extensive  conflagrations,  etc.  ;  while,  through  predo 
minance  of  phlegmatic  deragement,  one  dreams  of  swimming  upon  the 
sea;  immersions  in  rivers,  sprinklings  with  showers  of  rain,  silver 
mountains,  etc.,  (-3)  Dreams  appear  also  uuder  the  influence  of  adrstam 
(the  invisible  after-elfects  of  past  acts)  or  deserts.  These  are  cognitions, 
produced  in  one  whose  internal  sense  has  been  lulled  to  sleep  or  over 
powered  with  sleep,  in  respect  of  the  experiences  of  the  present  or 
previous  states  of  existence.  Therein  soinnial  cognition,  signifying 
good,  results  from  dharma  or  merit,  and  has  for  its  object  the  riding 
upon  elephants,  ascending  on  mountains,  acquistion  of  the  royal 


2&2  VAI&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


umbrella,  feasting  upon  pudding,  interview  with  the  sovereign,  and  the 
like  ;  whereas  soranial  cognition,  signifying  evil,  arises  from  adharmi 
or  demerit,  and  has  its  object  unction  with  oil,  falling  into  blind  wells, 
riding  upon  camels,  immersion  in  mire,  the  seeing  of  one's  own  nuptials, 
and  the  like. 

The  above  three,  only  as  jointly  operating,  have  causality  here  (i.e., 
in  the  production  of  dreams).  It  should  be  further  observed  that  this 
division  of  causes,  is  based  on  the  predominance  of  one  or  another  of 
the  qualities  of  these  causes  in  their  effects. — 7. 

Cognition  accompanying  dreaming,  how  produced. 

Upatkilra.—- It  may  bo  objected  :— The  cognition  which  springs  up  in  tho  midst  of  a 
dream,  in  the  form  of  reoollootion  of  the  very  same  object  which  is  experiencad  in  sonmial 
cognition,  does  not  posaoss  tho  nature  of  dreaming  inasmuch  as  dreaming  takes  the  form  of 
perceptual  experience.  From  vrhat  cause,  then,  doea  it  arise  ? 

To  this  he  gives  the  reply  : 


Svapna-antikara,  that  which  intervenes    in,    or    lies    near 
to,  or  accompanies,  dream. 

8.     (So  is)  consciousness  accompanying  dreams.—  349. 

The  word  '  so  '  comes  in  from  the  preceding  aphorism.  The  mean 
ing,  therefore,  is  that  as  dreaming,  so  also  consciousness  accompanying 
dreaming  arises  from  a  particular  conjunction  between  the  soul  and  the 
mind  and  also  from  impression  or  retention.  The  difference  between  the 
two  cases  extends  only  thus'.f  ar  that  soranial  cognition  results  from  impres 
sion  or  retention  produced  by  former  experience,  while  consciousness 
accompanying  dreaming  results  from  impression  or  retention  produced 
by  experience  arising  at  the  very  time  (of  dreaming.)  It  has  been  accord 
ingly  stated  by  Professor  Parsatttadcva,  "  Somnial  cognition  is  merely 
recollection,  inasmuch  as  it  results  from  looking  back  upon  past  cogni 
tions."  The  writer  of  the  vritti  also  says,  "  Somnial  cognition,  its 
function  being  the  illumination  of  experienced  objects,  is  not  a  different 
thing  from  recollection.'' 

Some  teach  that  '  consciousness  accompanying  dreaming  '  is  cogni 
tion  amounting  to  certitude,  in  the  midst  of  dreams,  as,  for  example, 
"  I  am  in  a  state  of  lying  on  the  bed,"  etc.  —  8. 

Another  cause  of  dreaming  and  of  cognition  in  dreaming. 

Upttakdra.  —  He    adds    another     cause    of    dreaming    and    consciousness    accompanying 
dreaming. 


II  S.  T  R  I  5.  II 

Dharmat   from  dharma  or  merit,  ^r    Cha,  also. 

9.     (Dreaming   and    consciousness    accompanying    dreaming 
result)  from  dharma  also.  —  350. 

The    word    '  cha  '    is    used    with    the   purpose    of    adding  adharmar 
demerit.     This  has  been  already  explained.  —  9. 


KAN  AD  A  SftTRAS  Ix,  2,  11.  293 

Vivrlti.  —  *  *  *  *  Some  think  that  this  aphorism  has  been  laid 
down  for  the  purpose  of  showing  that  in  some  cases  dreaming,  etc.,  are 
also  produced  from  dharma,  etc.,  alone,  even  without  the  action  of 
Samskdra  or  impression,  and  that  the  poetic  observation  of  Sriharsa 
that  the  maid  Sleep  brings  before  the  vision  of  man,  through  the  all- 
pervading  efficacy  of  adfistam,  even  objects  which  have  not  been 
•observed  before,  accordingly  becomes  explained. 

Causes  of  Avidya  or  Incertitude. 
I7paskdra.-—Now,  referring  to  the  series  (of  doubt,  dream,  incertitude)  he  says  :— 


n  s.  i  *  i?o  H 


Indriya-dosat,  from  imperfection  of  the  senses. 

13amskara-dosat;  from   imperfection    of    impression.  *3  Cha,    and. 
A-vidya,  false  knowledge.    Incertitude. 

10.  False  knowledge  (arises)  from  imperfection  of  the  Senses 
and  from  imperfection  of  Impression.  —  351. 

The  word  '  A-vidya/  though  a  general  term,  applies  to  incertitude, 
according  to  the  context,  doubt,  dream,  and  incertitude  having 
been  mentioned.  Therein  imperfection  of  the  senses  is  inefficiency 
caused  by  predominance  of  the  bile,  etc.  Imperfection  of  impression 
is  the  being  accompanied  with  non-observation  of  distinctions  ;  for 
under  such  non-observation,  false  cognition  is  produced.  —  10. 

Vivfiti.  —  Understanding  according  to  another  mode  is  divided  into 
two  kinds,  certitude  and  incertitude.  Of  these,  he  states  the  cause  of 
incertitude. 

'  Indriya-dosah,'  is  such  as  opthalmia,  etc.  '  Samskara-dosah  '  ig 
the  being  the  effect  of  erroneous  experience,  etc.  The  word  '  and  ' 
implies  the.  addition  of  such  imperfections  as  remoteness,  etc.,  and  also 
sub-sumptions  of  false  marks  or  middle-terms,  etc.  The  cause,  then,  of 
false  knowledge  or  incertitude  is  imperfection  ;  and  imperfection,  aa 
•consisting  of  biliousness,  remoteness,  etc.,  is  of  diverse  kinds. 

The  characteristic  of  Avidya. 
.—  He  states  the  characteristic  oridefinition  of  avidyd  in  general  : 


II  &  I  *  I  U  N 


^  Tat,  that.  Avidyd.  false  knowledge.  £g9MH  Dusta-jfianam,  im 
perfect  cognition. 

11.     That  (/.  e.,  Avidya)  is  imperfect  knowledge.  —  352. 

'  Tat,'  an  indeclinable  word,  conveying  the  sense  of  a  pronoun, 
alludes  to  avidyd.  That,  avidyd,  is  'dustajnanam',  i.e.,  cognition  which  is 
anduly  applied,  cognition  that  a  thing  is  what  in  fact  it  is  not,  in  other 
words,  cognition  determined  in  the  manner  of  a  divergent  object,  and 


294  VAI£E§IKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

having  the  mode  which  does  not  reside  in  the  object  in  question.  Imperfec 
tion  consists  also  of  cognition  taking  the  form  of  uncertainty.  Doubt, 
therefore,  even  where  there  is  only  one  alternative,  is  vicious,  being 
identical  with  non-assurance  or  non  ascertainment. 

The  four  (forms  of  avidyd),  therefore,  namely,  Doubt,  Error,  Dream, 
and  Regression  or  Indecision  are  included  in  this  aphorism. — -11. 

The  characteristic  of  Vidya. 
Upatkdra.— (He  declares  what  scientific  cognition  is  :) 

II  S.  I  R  I  ?R  II 

Adustatn,  not  imperfect.     Free  from    imperfection,  f^nj  Vidya 
true  knowledge,  Vidyd. 

12.  (Cognition)  free  from  imperfection,  is  (called)  Vidya  or 
scientific  knowledge. — 353. 

The  word  "  Cognition  "  comes  in  (from  the  preceding  aphorism). 
*  Adustam  '  means  produced  by  organs  of  sense  which  are  not  inefficient 
or  defective  (in  consequence  of  any  derangement  mentioned  above). 
The  meaning,  therefore,  is  that  vidyd  is  the  experience  of  a  thing  in  its 
proper  place,  or  the  experience  of  a  thing  in  the  same  manner  in  which 
another  thing  having  a  common  substratum  with  the  former  ig  experi 
enced,  or  experience  of  a  thing  not  having  the  mode  which  does  not 
reside  in  the  thing  in  question.  It  is  of  two  kinds,  immediate  or  sensu 
ous,  and  mediate  or  inferential. — -12. 

Cognition  by  tiaycis  Siddhas,  how  produced. 

Upaskdra. — It  may  be  objected  :  The  cognition  (of  objects  beyond  tho  reach  of  senses), 
by  advanced  sages,  also  appears  in  tho  very  samo  form  in  which  other  cognitions,  having 
a  common  substratum  with  the  former,  take  placu.  It  is  again  not  produced  by  the  senses, 
inasmuch  as  it  cognizes  objects  which  are  not  in  contact  with  them.  Nor  is  it  produced 
by  means  of  inferential  marks,  as  it  is  produced  in  tho  absence  of  any  investigation  of  such 
marks.  Hence  it  follows  that  there  is  a  third  form  of  proof  (besides  perception  and  inference) 
which  is  the  instrument  of  suoh  cognition. 

In  view  of  this  objection,  ho  says  : 


:  n  a.  i  ^  i  \\  n 

Arsam,  sagely.  Of  advanced  sages,  fa^fa  Siddha-darsanam, 
viiion  of  tho  Perfected  Ones.  ^  Cha,  and.  vwqfVif  :  Dharmmebhyah,  from 
dharma  or  merits. 

13.     Cognition  of  advanced  sages,  as  also    vision  of    the    Per 
fected  Ones,  (results)  from  dharma  or  merits. — 354. 

'  Arsrn  '  or  sagely  cognition  is  the  cognition  of  sages  such  as  Gdlava, 
etc.,  having  for  its  object  things  past  and  yet  to  come.  'Siddha-darfianam' 
means  the  vision  by  those  who  have  attained  success  in  the  direction  of 
cognition  apprehensive  of  objects  remote  as  well  as  screened  from  view,  by 
means  of  mantra  or  incantation,  herbs,  eye-salve  prepared  from  cocoort, 
etc.  Both  of  them  arise  from  dharma  or  merit,  such  that  there 
cognition  of  objects,  in  their  true  light.  The  author  of  the 


KANADA  SttTRAS  IX,  2,  13.  295 

observes  that  this  cognition  is  not  a  different  kind  of  vidyd  or  scientific 
knowledge,  as  it  is  included  in  Yogic  or  ascetic  perception.  Sagely 
cognition  is  really  the  fourth  kind  of  vidyd,  and  it  occurs  to  sages  as 
well  as  to  worldly  people.  And  it  is  simply  a  form  of  mental  percep 
tion,  being  produced  by  the  mind  accompanied  with  inattention  (to 
internal  and  external  objects),  or  produced  by  inferential  marks  such 
as  faithful  observances  of  the  rules  of  conduct.  The  cognition  of 
pervasion  which  is  the  ground  of  inference  is  here  solely  dependent 
upon  or  due  to  Samvkdra,  or  impression  having  its  origin  in  a  former 
state  of  existence  I.  e-,  in  the  same  way  as  is  the  pervasion  or  universal 
concomitance  of  sucking  the  breast  and  the  cognition  that  this  is  the 
means  of  securing  what  is  desired,  (in  the  case  of  the  instinctive 
application  of  the  baby  to  sucking  the  breast.) 

The  revered  Professor  Prasas£a<ieva,however,says  that'Siddhadaria- 
nam,'  cognition  of  the  Perfected  Ones,  is  not  a  different  form  of  cognition. 
His  reasoning  is  as  follows  :  If  it  is  said  that  cognition,  by  the 
Perfected  Ones,  of  objects  remote  and  hidden  from  view,  takes  its  rise 
from  conditions  brought  about  by  means  of  eye-salve  prepared  from 
cocoon,  and  the  like,  then  it  is  nothing  but  perception.  If  it  be,  on  the 
other  hand,  cognition  which  apprehends  objects  beloging  to  the  earth, 
the  region  lying  between  the  earth  and  the  vault  of  heaven,  and  the 
space  beyond  it,  and  which  is  dependent  upon  the  conditions  or 
inferential  marks  such  as  the  movements,  etc.,  of  planets  and  the  lunar 
mansions  (naksatras^  then  it  is  nothing  but  inferential  cognition, 
inasmuch  as  pervasion,  or  universal  concomitance  of  the  thing  to  be 
inferred  and  the  mark  of  inference,  is  determined  by  the  observation 
of  such  accompaniment.- — 13. 

Here  ends  the  second  chapter  of  the  ninth  book  in  the  Commentary 
of  £aiikara  upon  the  Vaisesika  Aphorisms. 


296  VAI&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

BOOK   TENTH—  CHAPTER  FIRST. 
Pleasure  and  Pain  are  two  different  things. 

Upa»kdra.-—ThQ  purpose  of  the  tenth  book  is  the  exposition  of  the  differences  of  the- 
attributes  of  the  soul  according  to  their  causes.  Now,  in  the  aphorism  of  Qautama,  which 
enumerates  or  classifies  the  provablea  or  objects  of  certitude,  viz.,  «'  Soul,  Body,  Sense, 
Object,  Understanding,  Mind,  Activity,  Fault,  Metempsychosis,  Desert,  Pain,  and  Emanci 
pation  are  the  provable"  Nydya-Sdtram,  I.  i.  9.),  there  bein<4  no  mention  of  pleasure,  the 
error  may  arise  that  pleasure  is  really  not  different  from  pain.  With  the  purpose  of 
dispelling  this  possible  error,  the  author  first  of  all  points  out  the  difference  of  pleasure  and 
pain  themselves. 


:  II  *o  I  t  I  t  II 

Ista-anista-karana-visesat,  in  consequence  of  the- 
differrence  of  causes,  (in  the  forma  of)  desirables,  and  undesirable  facjvftfj 
Virodhat  on  account  of  opposition.  ^  Cha,  and.  faaj:  Mithah,  between 
them,  towards  each  other,  mutual,  g&£:&qt:  Sukha-duhkhayoh,  between 
plasure  and  pain.  ^farc^TR:  Artha-antara-bhava^,  relation  of  different 
objects. 

1.  In  consequence  of  the  difference  of  (their)  causes,  in  the 
form  of  desirables  and  undesirables,  and  on  account  of  (their) 
mutual  opposition,  Pleasure  and  Pain  stand  in  the  relation  of 
objects  different  from  each  other.  —  355. 

1  Sukha-duhkahayoh/  (between  pleasure  and  pain  there  exists) 
'  mitha^/  mutual,  l  artha-antara-bhavah,'  distinction  that  is  to  say 
heterogeneity.  Whence  (does  this  distinction  arise)?  To  this  quention 
the  author  replies,  '  ista-anista-karana-visesat  '  i.  #.,  in  consequence  of 
'visesah,'  distinction  or  difference,  of  their  causes  which  have,  in  the  one- 
case,  the  form  of  'istam,'  desirable  objects  such  as  garlands,  sandal-paste, 
women,  etc.,  and,  in  the  other  case,  the  form  of  '  anistam/  undesirable 
objects  such  as  snakes,  thorns,  etc.  For  heterogeneity  of  effect 
necessarily  follows  from  heterogeneity  of  cause.  He  lays  down  another 
principle  of  distinction,  viz.,  '  virodhat/  on  account  of  opposition 
characterised  by  non-dwelling  together,  for  pleasure,  and  pain  are- 
not  experienced  in  one  and  the  same  soul  at  one  and  the  same  time. 
The  word,  '  cha,'  and,  brings  forward  the  difference  of  the  effect  of 
pleasure  and  pain  as  a  further  means  of  distinguishing  betwean  them. 
Thus,  graciousness,  the  embrace,  clearnesss  of  the  eyes,  etc.,  are  the  effects 
of  pleasure,  while  despondency,  a  sullied  countenance,  etc.,  are  the  effects 
of  pain;  hence  on  this  ground  also  pleasure  and  pain  must  differ  from 
each  other.  Accordingly  it  has  been  stated  by  Professor  Prasaftta-devaf 
"Pleasure  has  the  characteristic  of  agreeable  feeling.  In  the  presence 
of  garlands  and  other  desirable  objects,  from  the  contact  of  the  senses- 
and  objects  in  the  recognition  of  something  desirable  being  produced,. 
and  from  the  conjunction  of  the  soul  and  the  mind  and  dependent  upon 
dharma  or  merit  and  the  like,  that  which  is  produced  and  is  the  cause 
of  complacence,  embrace,  and  kindliness  of  the  eyes,  etc.,  is  pleasure." 


KAN  ADA  SOTRAS  X,  1,  2.  207 


In  the  «ase  of  garlands,  sandal-paste,  etc.,  enjoyed  in  the  pait,  plearure 
arises  from  smriti,  reminiscence,  and,  in  the  case  future  objects,  it 
arises  from  $an/ra/pa,  desire  or  appetency  or  imagination  or  will. 

The  non-enumeration  of  pleasure  in  the  aphorism  of  Gautama  is  in 
order  to  promote  indifference  or  dispassion,  in  other  words,  to  teach 
that  dispassion  would  arise  in  one  who  should  account  even  pleasure  as- 
pain.  (Cf-  Nydya  IStitram,  IV.  i.  58,  5:wfr^T§HTfa»n»rT«^,  The  idea  of 
pleasure  takes  place  in  an  alternative  form  of  pain).  — 

Pleasure  and  Pain  are  not  forms  of  cognition. 

Upaakdra.  —  It  may  be  urged  :  Lot   pleasure   a»d   pain    bo    mutually    distinct.     But    (  h«y 
way  be  non-different  from  cognition,  like  recollection  and  perception  of  sensation. 

Accordingly  the  author  says  : 


Samsaya-nirnaya.antara-abhjiva,  non-inclusion  in 
doubt  and  certainty.  •*  Cha,  and.  10*1*^$  JMna-antaratve,  in  the 
matter  of  being  different  from  cognition.  \g:  Hetuh,  reason,  mark. 

2.  And  the  non-inclusion  (of  Pleasure  and  Pain)  either  in 
Doubt  or  in  Certainty,  is  the  mark  that  they  are  other  than 
cognition.  —  356. 

The  meaning  is  that  non-inclusion  either  in  doubt  or  in  certainty 
is  the  mark  of  inference  that  pleasure  and  pain  are  other  than,  i.  e.. 
different  from,  cognition.  The  idea  is  this  ;  Were  pleasure  or  pain  a 
kind  of  cognition,  it  would  either  have  the  form  of  doubt,  or  have  the 
form  of  certainty.  It  cannot  be  the  first,  as  the  two  alternatives  (which 
must  be  present  in  doubt;  do  not  exist  ;  nor  can  it  be  the  seeond,  as 
the  single  alternative  does  not  exist  (see  Vivriti—  below).  And  the 
species  or  parts  being  thus  excluded,  the  geuns  or  whole  is  necessarily 
excluded.  For  the  species  of  cognition,  are  two  only,  the  characteristic 
of  doubt  and  the  characteristic  of  certainty.  And  both  of  them  are 
excluded  from  pleasure  as  well  as  from  pain  ;  hence  the  characteristic 
ofcognition  also  finds  no  place  in  them. 

The  word,  '  cha  '  and,  a  Ida  on  the  exclusion  of  external  sensation  or 
perception.  The  perception  of  pleasure  and  pain  is  mental  i.  e.t  by  the 
inner  sense,  in  the  forme,  "  I  feel  pleasure,"  "  I  feel  pain  "  •  whereas 
perception  of  them  does  not  take  such  shape  of  form  as  in  "I  k  <ow  " 
"  I  and  doubtful,"  "  I  am  certain."—  2. 


i-  —  *  Neither  pleasure  nor  pain  has  the    form    in  which 

two  repugnant  alternatives  are  present  together,  that  it  should  be 
probable  that  they  have  the  nature  of  doudt,  nor  has  either  possession 
of  a  given  form  together  with  absence  of  negation  of  that  form,  that  it 
should  be  likely  that  they  have  the  nature  if  certainty.  The  supposi 
tion  of  a  third  form  of  cognition  is  chimerical  like  the  horn  of  a  hare. 
Ooncequently  neither  pleasure  nor  pain  can  come  under  knowledge. 

Pleasure  and  Pain  are  not  form  cognition  —  continued. 
UpaikAra.  —  Ho  laya  down  another  principle  of  differentiation, 


298  VAI&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


?r4t:  Tayoh,  their,  of  doubt  and  certainty,  f^qfw:  Nispattih,  pro 
duction.  S^fTl^fff'fiP^'J,  Pratyaksa-laiagikabhyarn,  by  means  of  percep 
tion  and  inference. 

3.     The  production  thereof  (i.e.,    of    Doubt   and    Certainty)  is 
by  means  of  perception  and  inference.  —  357. 

'Tayoh,'   of  doubt  and  certainty,  'nispattih,'    production,    (is)    from 
perception  and  from  inferential    marks.     Neither    pleasure  nor    pain  is 
produced  by  the    perceptive    apparatus  or  by    inferential  marks.     For, 
pleasure    is    four-fold,    being     objective,     subjective,     imaginative    or 
•sympathetic,  or  habitual.     Of  these,  the  last    three  by  no  means  possess 
the    characteristic  of  taking  their  origin  from  the  contact  of  the  (outer) 
senses  (with    their    objects).     Should  it  be    contended    that    the   first  is 
cognition,  inasmuch    as  it  is    generated  by    contact    of  the    senses  and 
their  objects,  we  reply    that   it  is  not    so,  for  a  part    only    of  the    whole 
cause,  (being  the  same),  cannot  entail    homogeneity  in    the    effect  ;  else 
ill  and  sundry  effects  would  come  to  be.  homogeneous  as  they  must  have 
'pace  and  time  as  their    common    antecedents.      Moreover,  (if    pleasure 
ivere  cognition),  the  pleasure  which  is  not  produced  through  contact  of 
r,he  senses  and    their    objects,    would    be    either    non-discriminative    or 
udefinite,  or  discriminative  or  definite.     But    it    cannnot    be  the    first, 
1>r  then  it  would  be  supersensible  ;  nor  can  it  be  the  second,    inasmuch 
as    it    does    not   consist    of     a     judgment    respecting    two    objects     in 
the     relation    of    subject    and    predicate.     Again,     pleasure    and    pain 
are     necessarily     accompanied     with    sensibility  ;    (were     they     forms 
of  cognition),    there    would   be  involved  in  the  (consequent)  notion  of  a 
sensibility  of  cognition   a    regression    to    infinity.  'Laingikam' 

(the  adjective)  meaus  merely  '  lingam  '  (the  noun),  mark,    as    the  word, 
objective,  (means  an  object). 

The  author  of  the  VTitti,  on  the  other  hand,  explains  the  aphorism 
thus,  that  the  origin  thereof,  i.  e.,  of  cognition  and  pleasure,  is  explain 
ed,  '  pratyksa-laingikam,'  L  e.,  by  the  explanations  of  perceptual  and 
inferential  cognitions,  that  is  to  say,  that  whereas  perceptual  cognition 
is  produced  by  the  senses,  and  inferential  by  marks  of  illation,  it  is  not 
•so  with  pleasure,  etc.  —  3. 


i  _  It  may  be  urged  that  as  non-discriminative  cognition  is 
neither  "doubt  nor  certitude,  so  too  may  be  pleasure  and  pain.  Accord 
ingly  he  says  : 

The  proof  of  pleasure  and  pain  is  furnished  by  perception  and 
inference.  In  one's  own  soul,  pleasure  and  pain  are  proved  by  per 
ception  ;  in  other  souls,  pleasure  is  inferred  by  brightness  of  the  eyes, 
etc.  and  pain  by  paleness  of  the  face,  etc.  So  that,  had  they  the  form 
of  non-discriminative  cognition,  there  could  be  no  perception,  nor 
could  it  be  possible  for  them  to  be  the  subject  of  inference  by  such 
marks  as  brightness  or  paleness  of  the  face,  and  the  like.  Hence, 
the  import  is,  they  are  not  included  in  cognition. 


KANADA  SftTRAS  X,  1,5. 


Pleasure  and  Pain  are  not  forms  of  cognition.——  continued. 

Upattkdra.  —  Ha  points  out  the   difference    of   pleasure,  etc.,   from    inferential     tqgnltion. 
depending  upon  a  difference  of  their  modes  or  appearance. 


MO  i  *  i  *  M 

Abhut,  (it)  was.  ffa  Iti,  such  modal  distinction.  <jfo  Api,  also. 

4.  '«  (It)  was  "  —  such  (modal  distinction)  also  (establishes  the 
difference  between  pleasure  or  pain  and  cognition.)  —  358. 

The  word  '  iti  '  indicates  the  form.  The  word  l  api  '  implies  another 
form,  viz.,  "  (It)  will  be."  Thus,  in  inferential  cognition,  e.  g.t  "  Ther& 
was  or  will  be  lire  in  the  mountain,"  the  modal  distinction  of  the  past, 
etc.,  is  observed  ;  but  pleasure  or,  pain,  produced  under  this  form,  has 
never  been  observed.  —  4 

Vivriti  —  *  *  *  *  Cognition  is  conversant  about  objects  past, 
future,  and  present.  But  of  other  pleasure  or  pain,  no  object  whatever 
exists.  Therefore,  by  the  application  of  contradictory  properties,  viz.,. 
objectivity  and  non-objectivity,  it  follows  that  pleasure  and  pain  ara 
not  identical  with  cognition. 

Plcasiire  and  Pain  are  not  forms  of  cognition  —  continued. 
Upasledra.  —  He  brings  forward  a  further  ground  of  differentiation  : 


U  ?*  I   \\  *  II 


Sati,    existing.  «ar  Cha,  also.    ^TT^jfofTT^   Karyya-adarsanat,  be 
cause  of  the  non  -observation  of  the  effect. 

5.  Also  (Pleasure  and  Pain  are  not  forms  of  cognition), 
inasmuch  as  the  effect,  (pleasure  or  pain),  is  not  observed,  where 
(the  antecedents  of  cognition)  are  present.  —  359. 

Pleasure  or  pain  is  not  merely  perception  or  merely  inferential 
cognition,  since  the  effect,  pleasure  or  pain,  is  not  observed,  where 
contact  of  the  senses  and  objects  exists,  or  where  there  is  recognition  of 
the  universal  concomitance  (which  is  the  ground  of  inference),  of  the 
mark  of  inference  being  a  property  of  the  minor  term,  etc.  The  mean 
ing,  therefore,  is  as  follows  :  It  has  been  already  stated  that  pleasure 
and  pain  are  not  cognition  in  general,  (i.  e.,  non-discriminative  cogni 
tion).  Should  they  be  cognition  in  particular  (or  discriminative 
cognition),  they  would  be  either  perceptual  cognition  or  cognition  in 
the  form  of  inference".  (Pleasure  and  pain  cannot  be  the  former), 
inasmuch  as  the  experience  of  the  element  of  pleasure  does  not  take  place 
during  the  perception  of  garlands,  sandal-paste,  etc.,  on  the  contact 
of  the  senses  and  their  object  ;  nor  can  they  be  the  latter,  since  there 
is  no  experience  of  the  pleasurable  or  the  painful,  as  the  case  may  be 
where  there  exists  an  inference  respecting  sandal-paste,  etc.,  or  an 
inference  respecting  fire,  etc.  In  like  manner,  pleasure  and  pain  being; 


300  VAI£E§IKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


not  experienced  in  any  particular  act  of  perception  or  in  particular  act 
of  inference,  they  are  also  not  the  particulars  of  that  perception  or 
that  inference.  —  5. 

Bhdtya  reads  tiaticlia  of  X  i.  5  as  a  separate  aphorism,  and  explain/* 
it  thus  :  Cognition  arises,  Sati,  i.  «.,  iu  respect  of  objects  actually  exist 
ing  at  the  moment.  Cognition  accordingly  relates  to  past,  present,  and 
future  objects.  But  this  is  not  the  case  with  pleasure  and  pain.  Herein 
also,  therefore,  there  is  difference  between  cognition,  on  the  one  hand, 
and  pleasure  and  pain,  on  the  other. 

Above  continued  :  Causes  of  Ple,a*ure   and  Pain. 
Upaikdra.  —  He  mentions  another!  differentiating  characteristic. 


I  ?«  \  \  \  \  II 

Eka-artha-samavayi-karana-antaresu,  there  ex 
isting  other  causes  co-inherent  in  one  and  the  same  object.  JffTFT 
Driftatvat,  from  the  being  observed.  Because  they  are  observed. 

6.  (Pleasure  and  Pain  are  not  form  of  cognition),  because 
they  are  observed,  when  there  exist  other  causes  co-inherent  in  one 
and  the  same  object,  (i.  e.,  the  soul).  —  360. 

"  Of  pleasure  and  pain  "  —  such  is  the  complement  (of  the  aphorism). 
In  relation  to  pleasure,  uncommon  or  specific  causes  co-inherent  in  one 
and  the  same  object  are  dharma  or  merit,  attachment  to,  or  attraction 
for,  pleasure,  desire  for  the  cause  of  pleasure,  volition  or  striving  to 
secure  the  material  (cause)  of  pleasure,  and  cognition  of  garlands, 
sandle-paste,  etc.;  while  in  relation  to  pain,  they  are  adliarma,  or 
demerit,  and  cognition  of  thorns  and  other  undesirable  object.  The 
meaning  is  that  (pleasure  and  pain  differ  from  cognition;,  inasmuch 
as  they  are  observed  on  the  co-inherence  of  these  causes  in  one  and  the 
same'  object.  But  cognition  which  is  non-discriminative,  does  not  at 
*11  stand  in  need  of  an  uncommon  cause  co-inherent  in  the  same  object 
(with  it).  Discriminative  cognition,  of  course,  depends  upon  a  cogni 
tion  of  predication  or  attribution  (or  judgment),  but  this  is  not  another 
cause,  that  is,  a  cause  heterogeneous  to  the  cause  of  the  cognition  itself. 
Conjunction  of  the  mind,  as  being  a  cause  common  (to  pleasure  and 
pain  with  cognition),  does  not  require  mention.  Though  reminiscence 
requires  samskdra,  impression  or  reproductiveness,  as  its  specific  or 
uncommon  cause,  yet  the  difference  therefrom  is  quite  obvious,  as  it  is 
for  this  reason  that  the  difference  (of  pleasure  and  pain)  has  been 
investigated  with  reference  only  to  cognition  or  perceptual  experience. 
Although  in  inferential  cognition  there  is  dependence  upon  the  recollec 
tion  of  pervasion  or  universal  concomitance,  the  cognition  that  the  mark 
is  a  property  of  the  minor  term,  etc.,  yet  it  is  thrown  overboard  by 
the  very  word  '  antara,'  other,  (in  the  aphorism).  The  probative  sense 
(of  the  aphorism)  is,  therefore,  that  pleasure  and  pain  are  different 
from  cognition,  inasmuch  as  they  are  the  products  of  uncommon  or 
particular  causes,  of  their  own  kind,  co-existing  in  the  same  subs 
tratum  with  them,  as  is  the  case  with  reminiscence,  and  with  the  first 
•sound  (in  a  series  of  sounds).  —  6. 


KANiDA   SfrTRAS  X,  1,7.  301 


An  objection  answered. 

L'paskAra. — It  may  be  objected;  If  the  difference  ef  pleasure  and  pain  from  cognition 
•depend  on  the  difference  of  their  causes,  and  if  the  difference  of  pleasure  and  pain  from  eaoh 
other  be  just  like  the  mutual  difference  between  a  pillar  and  a  water-pot,  etc.,  then  there  oan 
be  no  mutual  difference  between  the  body  and  its  parts  euoh  as  the  head,  the  feet,  the  back, 
the  stomach,  etc.,  there  being,  in  regard  to  ihese,  no  difference  in  their  causes,  whether  they 
be  thf!  ultimate  atoms,  binary  atomic  aggregates,  etc.,  or  blood  and  semen. 

To  meet  thi*  objection,  he  «ays: 


Eka-dese,  in  the  part.  f%  Iti,  such.  This,  j^rf^i^  Ekasrain,  in 
one  'body).  f*K'  Sirah,  the  head.  1%  Prietham,  the  back.  Wf^  Udarain, 
the  stomach.  <rotff%  Marmmani,  the  vitals.  5T%jfa:  Tat-viAesah,  their 
distinction.  rTfi^r^^:  Tat-visesebhyah,  from  the  distinctions  or  their 
causes .) 

7 .  The  head,  the  back,  the  stomach,  the  vitals  are  in  the 
parts  of  one  and  same  (body)  ;  this  their  difference  (results)  from 
the  differences  thereof  (/.  £.,  of  their  causes). — 361. 

1  Eka-desa  iti  '  means,  in  the  part.  '  Ekasmin  '  means,  in  the  body  ; 
*  Siralj  '  —this  is  one  part  ;  '  udaram  '  ;  '  pristham  '  ;  and  '  marmmani,' 
1.  ?.,  the  sinews,  etc.  ;  their  '  viiesah/  difference  in  kind,  (results).  '  tat- 
visesebhyah,'  from  the  difference  in  kind  of  their  causes.  There,  again, 
(i.e.,  in  the  case  of  the  heterogeneity  of  the  causes),  heterogeneity 
results  only  from  the  heterogeneity  of  the  causes  (of  those  causes)  ;  for, 
the  combinative  causes  of  the  stomach,  the  back  etc.,  also  are  not  just  of 
the  same  kind  as  that  of  the  head  ;  just  as  the  heterogeneity  of  a  spiece 
of  eloth,  a  water-pot,  etc.,  results  from  the  heterogeneity  of  threads, 
postherds.  and  other  material  causes  ;  heterogeneity  being  possible, 
in  them  also,  the  heterogeneity  of  threads,  postherds,  etc.,  also,  results 
from  the  heterogeneity  of  fibres,  dust,  etc.  Heterogeneity  is,  in  like 
manner,  to  be  sought  in  the  successive  material  causes  :  for,  while  the 
ultimate  atoms  may  be  common,  the  heterogeneity  of  the  respective 
material  causes  universally  gives  rise  to  heterogeneity  (in  their  res 
pective  effects)  ;  whereas  homogeneity  of  the  material  «auses,  constitu 
ted  by  their  substanceness,  does  not  cause  such  heterogeneity.  This  is 
the  point. — 7. 

Hkdsya  : — rtad  Ekadeie  iti  of  X.  i.  7  with  X.  i.  6,  and  explains  it 
as  giving  an  additional  reason  why  pleasure  and  pain  cannot  be  forms 
of  cognition,  the  meaning  being  that  pleasure  and  pain  are  localised 
in  the  body,  whereas  cognition  is  not  so  localised. 

Here  ends  the  first  chapter  of  the  tenth  book  in  the  Commentary  oE 
•Sankara  upon  the  Vaiaesiki  Aphorisms. 


302  VAI&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


BOOK  TENTH—  CHAPTER  SECOND. 
Substance  is  tlie  only  combinative  cause. 

Upaskdra.  —  As  a  collateral  topic,  the  author  now    commences  a   special   discrimination  of 
the  three  causes  : 


II  ?°  1  H  I  ?  U 

Karanam,  cause.  ffa  Iti,  such.  ^  Dravye,  iu  substance. 
Karyya-samavayat,  from  the  combination  of  effect. 

1.  "(It  is  the  combinative)  cause"  —  such  (intuition  and  usage), 
with  regard  to  Substance,  (arise)  from  the  combination  of  effect 
(in  it).—  362. 

1  Karanam/  that  is,  that  it  is  the  combinative  cause  ;  <  iti/  such 
intuition  and  usage,  are  to  be  observed,  l  dravye,'  with  regard  to 
substance.  Why  so  ?  He  gives  the  reply  :  '  kfiryya-samavayat/  be 
cause  effect,  viz.,  substance,  attribute,  and  action,  combine  in  it 
alone.  —  1. 

Vivriti.  _  •*  *  *  *  The  definition  of  a  cause  in  general  is  that 
causality  consists  in  constant  antecedence,  there  existing  at  the  same 
time  voidness  of  failure  to  produce  the  effect  (that  is  to  say,  in  Mill's 
phraseology,  causality  o-onsists  in  invariable  and  unconditional  antece 
dence).  There  are  three  kinds  of  causes,  according  to  their  division  into 
the  combinative  or  material,  non-combinative  or  formal,  arid  instru 
mental  or  efficient.  *  *  *  * 

Substance    i-s-  effcient    cause  also. 

tfpatkdra.  —  It   may    bo   aaked  :     Do  then   subatancoa  (possess   only   combinative    causa 
lity  ? 

So  he  says  : 


Samyogat,  from  conjunction,  ^l    Va,  or,  and. 

2.  And,  through  conjunction,  (Substance  becomes  the  efficient 
or  conditional  cause  also).  —  363. 

As  combinative  causality,  so  also  efficient  causality,  belongs  to  the 
threads,  in  the  production  of  a  piece  of  cloth.  Inasmuch  as  conjunction 
of  the  shuttle  and  the  threads  is  also  a  cause  of  the  cloth,  the  shuttle 
and  the  thread,  are,  mediately  through  that  conjunction,  also  efficient 
cause  of  the  cloth.  The  word  '  va  '  is  used  in  a  collective  sense, 
inasmuch  as,  though  the  thread  possesses  combinative  causality  to 
wards  the  conjuction  of  the  shuttle  and  the  thread,  yet  it  possesses 
efficient  causality  towards  the  cloth,  mediately  through  such  conjunc 
tion.  —  2. 

Vivriti.  —  He  says  that  combinative  causality  belongs  to  subs 
tances,  not  only  because  effects  combine  in  them,  but  also  because  they 
are  fields  for  the  operation  of  non-combinative  causes. 


KANADA  SftTRAS  X,  2,  4.  303 


'  Samyogat  '  means    because    they  are    the   support    or    substratum 
wherein  takes  place  c&njunctiou  which  is  the  non-combinative  cause.*  * 

Actions  are  non-  combinative  causes. 
Upaskara.  —  He  explains  what  causality  resides  iu  Action  : 


MO 


Karane  in    the  cause.     <4*HNK  Samavayat,    from   combination. 
Karmmani,  actions. 

3.     Through  combination  in  the  (combinative)  cause,  Actions 
(are  non-combinarive  causes).  —  364. 

"  Non-combinative  causes"  —  such  is  the  complement  (of  the  apho 
rism.)  Non-combinative  causality  is  causality  combined  or  co-inherent 
in  one  and  the  same  object  connected  with  the  state  of  effect  and  cause. 
Such  causality  results  either  from  combination  in  the  same  object  with 
the  effect,  or  from  combination  in  the  same  object  with  the  cause.  Of 
these  the  former  is  called,  in  the  terminology  of  the  VaisesiJeas,  the 
slighter  or  minor,  and  the  latter,  the  greater  or  major,  proximity.  If  it  be 
asked  by  means  of  which  proximity,  then,  actions  possess  non-covnbin- 
ative  causality  towards  disjunction,  and  samsJcdra  or  impression  ;  it  is 
here  replied,  'karane  samavayat,'  (that  it  is;  through  combination  in  the 
combinative  cause  of  conjunction,  etc.  The  meaning,  therefore,  is  that 
non-combinative  causality  is  exercised  by  action  in  (the  production  of) 
conjunction,  etc.,  by  means  of  the  minor  proximity  characterised  as 
combination  in  the  same  object  with  the  effect.  —  3. 

Certain  Attributes  are  non-  combinative  causes,  and  occasionally 

efficient  causes  also. 

Upaskdra.  —  In  anticipation  of  the  question  as  to  what  kind  of  causality  pertains  to 
ooloui  and  other  attributes  residing  in  the  (conseituent)  parts,  in  relation  to  the  attributes  of 
the  wholes,  he  says  : 

O  I  R  I  8  II 


WH\  Tatha,  so.  ^T  Rupe,  in  colour.  «BTCm«in«?'*nwn^  Karana-eka- 
:artha-aaraavayat,  through  combination  in  the  same  object  with  the 
cause.  ^  Cha,  and,  also. 

4.  So  also  in  Colour  (there  is  non-combinative  causality) 
through  combination  in  the  same  object  with  the  cause. — 365. 

The  expression  '  colour  '  indicates  colour,  taste,  smell,  touch,  num 
ber,  magnitude  or  quantity,  separateness,  gravity,  fluidity,  viscidity, 
etc.  The  term 'so'  extends  (the  application  of)  non-combinative  causality. 
'  Karana-eka-artha-samavayat  '  :  (This  non-combinative  causality  of 
colour,'  etc.)  originates  the  colour,  etc.,  of  the  wholes,  by  means  of  the 
major  proximity  (constituted)  by  (their)  combination  in  the  same  object 
with  the  whole,  which  is  the  combinative  cause  of  the  colour,  etc.,  of  that 
•whole  ;  as,  for  instance,  the  colour,  etc.,  of  the  potsherds  originate  the 


304,  VAI£E§IKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


colour,  etc.,  in  the  water-pot,  and  similarly  it  should  be  observed  in  all 
other  cases.  The  word  <cha'  implies  that  occasionally  colour,  etc., 
possess  efficient  causality  also.  —  4. 


X.    ii.  4    as    two    aphorisms,    viz.,    Tatkd    r&pc,  and 
KAr&nai-kdrtha-Samavdydcheha. 

(Jon  junction  in  a  non-combinative  cause. 

Cpatkdra.—He  states  that  the  minor  proximity  belongs    to   conjunction    whil«  it  is  a 
non-combinative  cause  in  the  origination  of  substances  : 


II  ?  o  |  *n  U.  II 

Karana-samavnyat,   through    combination  in  the  cause. 
:  Samyogah,  conjunction,  q^q  Patasya,  of  the  cloth. 

5.     Through  combination  in  the  (combinative)  cause,  Conjunc 
tion  (is  a  non-combinative  cause)  of  the  cloth.  —  366. 

The  meaning  is  that,  through  combination  in  the  combinative  cause, 
conjunction  also  is  a  non-combinative  cause,  in  the  production  of  effects 
such  as  a  piece  of  cloth,  etc.,  by  means  of  the  proximity  characterised 
as  combination  in  the  same  object  with  the  effect.  The  word  l  cloth  ' 
indicates  product  substance  in  general. 

A  certain  author  maintains  that  if,  on  the  other  hand,  conjunction 
of  part  with  part  be  also  a  non-combinative  cause  of  a  piece  of  cloth 
and  the  like,  then  combination  in  the  same  object  with  the  cause  is  also 
(a  non-combinative  cause).  —  5. 

Above  continued. 

^Upaskdra.  —  He  says   that    causality    sometimes   pertains  to    oonjuuotion  by  means  of  the 
major  proximity  : 


o   I  ^  I    ^    || 

.  Karaua-karaua-samavayat,   through    combination 
in  the  cause  of  the  cause,  ^r  Cha,  and,  also. 

6.  And,  through  combination  in  the  cause  of  the  cause, 
(conjunction  becomes  a  non-combinative  cause  by  means  of  the 
major  proximity)  also.  —  367. 

The    conjunction,    technically    termed   prachaya,    (loose)    coalition 
aggregation,    and    residing  in  the  constituent  parts  of  a  bale  of  cotton 
originates  magnitude  in    the    bale    of    cotton.     Here    the    proximity    is 
-constituted  by   combination  in    the  same  object  with  the  cause.     This  is 
the  meaning.  —  6. 

Efficient  causes  declared. 

UpavMra.—  Having  thus  ascertained  causality   determined  by  the  combinative    cause   ha 
begins  a  new   section   for    ascertaining  efficient  causality. 

11  1  •  .  i  '  V  t  it,  ( 


SftrRASX,2,  8.  305 


*TS«!*nWPlT^  Samyukta-samavayat,  through  combination  in  the  con 
junct.     m?  Agneh,  of  fire,  t^lfa^  Vaisesikam,  distinctive  attribute. 

The  distinctive  attribute    of  Fire,  (i.  e.,  heat),  (becomes  an 
efficient  cause),  through  combination  in  the  conjunct.  —  368. 

1  Vaisesikam,'  distinctive  attribute,  '  agneh,'  of  fire,  in  other  word 
lieat,  becomes  an  efficient  cause  in  relation  to  the  effects  (colour,  etc./ 
produced  by  burning  or  baking,  through  combination  (of  colour,  etc.,) 
in  the  conjunct,  (i.  e.,  the  water-pot  placed  in  fire.)  This  is  indicative'; 
in  relation  to  cognition  everything  possesses  efficient  causality.  Under 
standing,  pleasure,  pain,  desire,  aversion,  volition,  merit,  demerit,  and 
impression  possess  efficient  causality  only.  It  should  be  observed  that 
this  system  or  elaboration  of  thought  has  the  purposes  of  establishing 
the  mutual  differences  of  pleasure,  etc.  —  7. 

Vicfiti  —  *  *  *  *  The  general  definition  of  an  efficient  cause  is 
to  be  understood  to  be  a  cause  other  than  the  combinative  and  non- 
combinative  causes.  *  *  *  * 

Observances  produru  adristam  an  their  fruit,  on  the  authority 

of  the  Veda. 

Upask.ira.  —  Xow,  in  order  to  confirm  the  authoritativeness  of  the  Vedas,    he    repeate  the 
very  same  statement  which  has  been  made  by  him  before  : 


in*  *  i  *  n 

T  DristanAm,  of  acts  observed  or  known  to  be  productive  of  good. 
Drista-prayojananam,  of  acts  the  purpose  of  which  has  been 
taught.  ^€T*n%  Drigta-abhave,  in  the  absence  of  visible  or  observed. 
faults  or  defects.  spfm  :  Frayogah,  performance.  SFi^W?  Abhyudayfiya, 
for  the  production  of  exaltation  or  adfistam. 

8.  The  performance  of  acts  of  observed  utility  and  of  acts 
the  purpose  whereof  has  been  taught  (in  the  sacred  writings),  is, 
for  the  production  of  adristam,  (as  these  teachings  are  authoritatArie 
being  the  word  of  God  in  whom)  the  defects  found  in  ordinary 
speakers  do  not  exist.  —  369. 

'Dristunum'  means,  of  acts  which  have  been  proved  to  be  useful  by  the 
evidence  of  experience,  e.</.,  sacrifices,  almsgivings,  ablution,  and  the  like. 
Drista-prayojananam'  means,  of  acts  the  purpose  whereof  has  been 
taught.  For,  thus,  "in  such  precepts  as  "  He  who  desires  heaven,  shall 
perform  sacrifice,"  u  He  who  desires  heaven,  shall  offer  oblation  in  the 
aynihotra  sacrifice,"  etc.,  the  fruit  or  purpose  is  mentioned  at  once 
along  with  the  injunction  ;  in  some  cases,  the  purpose  is  given  out  by 
way  of  a  recommendation,  as  in  a  The  pitrt-x  or  departed  ancestors  of 
him  who  studies  during  these  nights,  pour  down  upon,  or  send  down  to, 


806  VAlgESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 

him    streams    of    clarified   butter    and  streams  of  honey,"  etc.  ;  in  other 
cases,  the  purpose  is  left  to  be  imagined,  as    in  "  He    shall    perform  the 
Viivajit  sacrifice,"  etc.,  for,  here  the  purpose  is  neither  mentioned  along 
with  the  injunction  nor  presented  by  way  of  a  recommendation,  and    is 
therefore,    suppositional,    and    (it  cannot    be  any  thing  but  heaven),  for 
heaven    alone    should    be    supposed    as  the    purpose  or    fruit  which    is 
charming    in   itself.     That    being    so,    it    does  not  stand  to  reason   that 
these  acts  which  so  shortly  come  to    their    end,    should    have    causality 
towards  the  production  of  fruits  or  results  in  the  distant  future.  Hence, 
the  meaning  is,  'prayogah,  the  performance,  of  these  acts,  is  '  abhyuda- 
vava,  for  the  purpose  of  apfirvam,  that  is,  adTistain,  or  deserts.  It  might 
be    objected    as    follows  :     This    would    have    been   the    case,    were  the 
authoritativeness    of    the    Vedas    a  fact.     But  that  is  hard  to  maintain. 
For  the  authoritativeness  of  the    Vedas    as    being   eternally    free    from 
faults  or  defects  in  themselves,  is  not    desired    by    you,   (t.  e.,  the  Va-is- 
faifca),  as  it  is  by  the  Mimdmsd  school,  inasmuch  as  you   recognise    them 
as    the    production    of    a    person,    and    in    that  case,  it  is  possible  that 
mistake,  absence  of  mind,  intention  to  mislead,  and   other  defects  exist 
ed    in    the    person.     To    this    the    reply  is  given  by  the  phrase,  '  drista- 
abhave  '  which  means,    there   being    non-existence    of    personal  defects 
such    as    error,   absence  of  mind,  desire  to  mislead,  and  the  like,    which 
are  found  in   other  persons,  namely,  in  ourselves    and  others  ;  inasmuch 
as  the  Supreme  Person,  inferred  whether  as  the  Creator    of  the  earth  or 
as    the    Speaker    of    the    Vedas,    is    presented    to  us  entirely  under  the 
characteristic    of    freedom    from    faults  or  defects.     So  that  His  words 
can  neither  have    no    meaning,    nor    convey    a    contrary    meaning,  nor 
convey    a    useless    meaning.     It    is    only    impurities    caused    by    error, 
absence    of    mind,  inefficiency  of  the    senses,  and  the  like,  due  to  defec- 
tiveness  of  the  elements  constituting  the  physical  organism,  the  external 
senses,  and  the  mind,  that  may  possibly  vitiate  speech.  But  they  cannot 
possibly    lurk    in    the    word    of    ffivara.     It    has    been   accordingly  de 
clared  :— 


—Being  influenced  by  passion,  ignorance,  and  the  like,  a  speakei 
may  tell  untruths.  But  these  do  not  exist  in  Isvara.  How  can  He 
speak  otherewise  (than  truthfully)  ?  —  8. 

NotQ—~Cf.  VI.  ii.  1,  supra. 

Vivriti.  —  Thus  the  Prcdicables  have  been  ascertained,  as  also  Res 
emblance  and  Difference.  This  Sdstra  or  System  of  Self-culture  faci 
litates  manana,  intellection  or  'thinking  about  things,  in  them  only 
wfiose  chitta,  or  inner  sense  or  mind,  has  been  purified  by  the  perfor 
mance  of  acts,  and  not  in  them  whose  cliitta  has  not  been  so  purified. 
Observances  are  productive  of  purity  of  cliitta,  as  declared  by  such 
text  of  the  Veda  as  "  They  desire  to  know,"  etc.  The  same  has  been 
mentioned  before.  '  He  repeats  it  for  further  confirmation. 

*  :  *  Observances,  ***  when  performed  disinteres 
tedly,  do  not  produce  elysian  bliss,  etc.,  as  their  fruit,  but  produce  at 
their  result  purity  of  .cliitta  or  intellect,  etc.,  according  to  the  text  of 


KANADA   StfTRAS  IX,  2,  2.  307 


the  of.  Veda,  "  They  desire  to  know,"  and  the  /SmTiti,  "  When  worldly 
attachment  has,  by  observances,  borne  its  fruits,  knowledge  is  after 
wards  produced." 

Authoritativencas  of  the  Veda  established. 

UpasMra  —  It  may  be  urged  :  The  Veda  has  been  revealed  b}'    God,—  it    is  here  that  there- 
is  conflict  of  opinions. 

Accordingly  he  says  : 

11  to  R  i  s.  H 


Tat-vachanat,  from    being   the  word  of  Him,    G-od. 
Amnayasya,  of  the   Vedas,  sn»TT*rtf  Pramanyam,    authoritativeness 
finis.     According  to  Sridhara,    author  of  Nyaya  kandati,  "  "  tat    refers 
to  Risis. 

9.     The  authoritative  ness  of  the  Veda  (follows)  from    its  beintr 
the  Word  of  God.—  370. 

'  iti  ;  indicates  the  conclusion  of  the  Sdstra  or  system.  The  authori- 
tntiveness,  '  amnayasya/  of  the  Veda,  (is  derived),  l  vaehanat,'  from  its 
being  the  composition,  'tena,'  by  tsvara.  For,  thus,,  we  have  already 
proved  that  the  Vedas  have  a  personal  author,  inasmuch  as  they  are  a 
collection  of  sentences  or  declarations.  Nor  can  we  and  others  possibly 
l.e  the  speakers  of  them,  divided  and  sub-divided  as  they  are  in  a  thou 
sand  branches,  for  they  treat  of  objects  which  transcend  the  senses,  and 
beings  of  our  nature  cannot  behold  objects  which  transcend  the  senses. 
Moreover,  the  Vedas  must  have  been  spoken  by  a  trustworthy  person,  in 
asmnch  as  they  ar.e  accepted  by  men  of  light  and  leading.  That  which  is 
not  spoken  by  a  trustworthy  person,  is  not  accepted  by  men  of  light  and 
leading,  the  Vedas  are  accepted  by  men  of  light  and  leading,  therefore 
they  have  been  spoken  by  a  trustworthy  person.  To  be  spoken  by  a 
trustworthy  person  is  to  be  declared  by  a  self-governed  or  independent 
person  ;  and  to  be  accepted  by  men  of  light  and  leading  is  to  be 
believed  in,  and  acted  upon,  by  persons  attached  to  all  the  systems  of 
thought.  It  has  been  stated  before  that  non-appearance  of  the  fruit  or 
result,  which  occasionally  happens,  is  due  to  defect  or  flaw  in  the  act, 
or  performance,  the  agent,  and  the  means  or  requisites.  If  it  be  denied 
that  this  is  so,  there  being  no  recollection  on  the  part  of  the  agent  ; 
we  reply  that  the  denial  has  no  value,  it  having  been  already  proved 
that  there  is  recollection  on  the  part  of  the  agent.  The  composition 
thereof  by  Him  is  proved,  inasmuch  as  they  could  be  declared  only 
by  an  independent  person,  while  such  independent  power  to  declare 
the  Vedas  in  their  thousand  branches  is  as  has  been  said,  impossible 
fryr  beings  of  our  nature.  Moreover,  since  certitude  must  be  the  product 
cf  excellence  or  superiority,  the  certitude  derived  from  the  Vedas  must 
also  have  excellence  for  its  condition,  and  excellence  must  in  this  case 
be  pronounced  to  be  only  the  speaker's  accurate  knowledge  of  the  true 
meaning  of  the  sentences.  The  speaker  of  the  Veda  must,  therefore 


308  VA1&ESIKA  PHILOSOPHY. 


1)6  one  of  that  description,  one  who  has  immediate  cognition  of  heaven, 
•udristam  and  like  other  objects  ;  and  there  is  none  such  but  tsvara 
alone.  This  is  well  said. — 9. 

Xotf. — ty.  I.  i.  3,  supra. 

| 

The  fortunate  Sahkara,  who  is  the  son  of  Bhavandtha  by  Bhavda,}., 
and  who  is  devoted  to  the  worship  of  Siva,  has  written  this  commentary 
on  the  Aphorisms  of  Kandda. 

Even  though  this  production  of  mine  may  not  find  favour  \\ith 
others,  nay,  may  be  an  object  of  ridicule  with  them,  yet,  (it  is  hoped), 
it  will  be  adored  a  thousand  times  and  over  by  my  pupils,  out  of  respect 
for  their  teacher. 

_  +  _ 

Here  ends  the  second  chapter  of  the  tenth  book  in  the  commentary 
on  the  Vaisesika  Aphorisms  by  $ri  Sankara  Misra,  son  of  Mahamahopa- 
<lhyaya  Bhavanatha  Misra. 

And  complete  is  also  this  treatise. 


APPENDIX  1. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY. 

(Compiled  h-om  the  Vjdvakosa  and  Hull's  Catalogue}. 


An -nit*  of  Work*. 

1  A.p»aabda.-khandana 

2  A-hetu-aama-yvakarana 

:>  Atiua-tattva-vi  vekn 

4          -~kal},alaf:a 

~t -didh.it  i 

r>  K auada-rahasya 


8  K.anadtt-riihasya-saiiigraha 

l.  '  K  ana  da-samgrah  a  vy  a  khy  a 

1  0  Kanada-siitnv-vyakhyfui  » 

1  1  Knrikfxvali 


10 
17 

18 


tika 


— prakaia 

...          — kafiika  ... 

vy  a  khy  ft 

20         -bhaskara 

21  ......         — rahasya  ,., 

22  Kusumunjali     (-karika) 

-v-yakhyu... 


-oraktUa 

-makaranda 

-vritti 
vvakhva 


'•¥2  Kornala-tika-tika 
->3  Guna-kiranAvali 
-34        ......  -tika  ','/. 

'^         ......  -praka^n 

:36   liuna-didhiti-tippani 
37  ^nna-prakaAa'-didhiti 

......  ...         -raathtm 

......  -vivriti 

..........  bhava-praka$ika 

41    Guna-rahasya 


4--J  Guna-6irauiahi 

44 

40  GunA,iuuidi  (oji  No.    22) 

46  JAti-satka-j)rakarana 

47  Tattva-jfsana-vivrid'dhi-praka4a 

48  Tattvanusandhana 


f 


Karuulu 


LJdayana  ^Icharya. 
Saukara  Misra. 
Raghnnatlia  Bhattacliary* 
Padiuaiiabha    Mifiva. 
Saukara  .Misra. 


Anonymaux. 

RaghudeVa  Nyayalaukftrai 
Visvanaiiha. 
Udayana   Achai'ya. 
Udayaua. 
Krisiva  JBliatta.. 
Blmjjjiratlia  Thukkura. 
Mathuratiatha. 
Vardhamana  Upadhyav  i. 
Meglia   Bhagiratha. 
Unknown. 

Padmanabha  Varadaraj-t 
Mathuranatha. 
Udayaua  Acharya. 
Haiidaaa  Bhattacharyn 
Rumabhadra 
Rudra  F>hattucha  rya. 
Misra. 

Vardhamann    (Jpadhyay*. 
Ruchidatta. 
Unknown* 

Narayana  Tirtha  Yati. 
TriJoohaua  Deva. 
Visvauatha. 
Untraced. 
Untraced. 
Vardhamana. 
Jayarama  Bhattacahrya. 
Kaghanatha. 
Mathuranathft. 
Raghunatha. 
Rudra  BhattachArya 
Rfimbhadra. 
Madhava  Deva. 
Raghunatha. 
RAmakrisna 
Gunatianda. 
YiSvamltha 

*•• 

Unknown. 


310 


APPENDIX  I. 


49 
50 
51 
52 
53 
54 
55 
56 
57 
58 
59 
60 
61 
62 
63 
64 
65 
66 
67 
68 
69 
70 
71 
72 
73 
74 
75 
76 
77 
78 
79 
80 
81 
32 
83 
84 
85 
86 
87 
SB 
89 
90 
91 
92 
93 

94 

95 

96 

97 


100 


-prakasa 


Tarka-karika 

Tarka-kaumudi 

Tarka-dipika 

Tarka-pradipa 

Tarka-bhasa 

Tarka-inaujari 

Tarka-ratua 


Tarka-sariigraha 

-  chart  drika 

-tattva-prakhsa     .. 
Tarka-samgrahopanyasa 
Tarkamrita 

-chasaka 

-tatparya-tika 

-tarangiui  .. 

Dravya-kiranavali-praka&a         .. 

-pariksa  ... 

-sabda-viveehana 
Dravya-guna-paryuya 
Dravya-nirupana 
Drav\  a-pataka  ... 

Dravya-padartha 
Dravya-prakaaa-vivaiti 
Dravya-prakaAika 
Dravya-bhagya-tika  ••• 

Drayya-sara-samgraha 
Dvandva-viohAra 
Nirukti 
Nyaya-kandali 
Nyaya-tantra-bodhini 
Nyaya-tarangi  ni  ••• 

Nyay  a-bodhini  ••• 

Nyaya-lilavati 

-kanthabharana  ... 
...  -prakasa  ... 

-didliiti, 

...     -viveka  ... 

-bhava-prakafca  ... 
Nyaya-aai'a  ... 

Nyaya-siddhanata-muktilvali    ... 
Nyayartha-laghu-bodhini          ... 
Pada-krrtya 
Pada-samgraha 
Padartha-khandara 

-t.ika         ... 

•tatparya-tika    ... 
Fadartha-cliandrika  ••• 

-vilasa     ,4i          ••• 

Pti-lArtha-tattvavaloka  ..» 

...  -nirnaya  ••• 


.     Jivaraja  Diksita. 

Laugaksi  Bhaskara. 

Annain  Bhatta. 
.     Nilaka^tha  ^astri. 

Konda   Bhatta. 

Vrisva;iHtha. 
.     Jivaraja  Diksita. 

Konda  Bhatta. 
.      Viraraghava  Sastri. 

Aniiam  Bhatta. 

Mukunda  Bhatta. 

Unknown 

Meru  Sastri. 
Jagadisa  Tarkalankars. 

(fangai  a  ma  Jadi. 

MukumJa  Bhatta. 
,      Vardhainana. 

Rudra  Vachaapati. 

Chandrafiekhara  Bharati. 

Untraced. 

Untraeed. 

Untraced. 

Paksadhara. 

Raghu.iatha. 

Megha  Bhagiratha  fhakkur*. 

Anonymous. 

Baglmdeva. 

Gokulanatlia   Maithila. 

Pattabhirama  Sasfcri. 

Sriidhara  Aohirya. 

V  iftv  i    at  ha. 

Keaava. 

Grovardha»a  Misra. 

V  allabha  A'.'harya. 

Sankara  Miara. 

Vardhttuia  ia.  Upadhysiya. 

Raghunatha  Siromani. 

VidyavagiAa  Bhattacharya. 

Bliagiratha. 
Madhava  Deva. 
Visvauatha    Panch&nana. 
Govardhana  Ranga  Acharya. 
Chaudraraja  Simha. 
Krisna  Mist  a 
Raghunaih-i  Siromani. 
Govinda,  Madhava,  Kaghudeva., 
Ruchi-datta,  and  Ramabhadr*. 
Krisna  Misra. 
Misaru       Misra   (or    Sarngad- 

hara  ?) 
Krisna  Bhatta. 
Viavanatha. 

Anonymous. 


APPENDIX  1. 


311 


101 

102 

103 

104 

105 

10ft 

107 

lu8 

J09 

110 

111 

112 

113 

114 

115 

lit) 

117 

118 

119 

120 

121 

122 

12-3 

125 
126 
127 
128 
12  • 
130 
131 
1  2 
133 
134 
135 

13(5 

137 
13S 

1-J9 


Padartha-dipika 

Padartha-dharina-samgraha 

Padartha-airupana  ... 

Padartha-parijata 

Padartha-pr&aeSa 

Padartha-bodha 

Padartha-mani-mala 

-prakaaa       ... 

Padartha-viveka       (-siddhanta- 

tattva) 
-tika 

P  a  r  i b  ha  sa - v  i  se  sa 
Praiuaiia  majijari 
Baliyartha-bhanga-uirakaraiia 
Bhasa-parichchheda  ... 

Bheda-prakasa 
Mita-bhasiui 

Mithya-tva-vana-rahasya 
Mukti-vada-tika 
Hutu  a  kosa 

...          -kara-padartha 

...  -tnata-vada 
-karika-vichara 
-mata-rahasya 
-vada  or   -vic'hara... 

•rahasya 
Uasa  sara 

Ua  lilhauta-muktahara 
Laksanavali 

-tika 

Lilavati-rahasya 
V  a  la-sudha  tika  ratnavali 
Vaisea  ka-vatna-ma!a  ... 

[•t-Sutra 

-ii,  askara 
-tika  ... 

..  -bliasya  ... 

-vantika         ... 
-vi\  riti 
-vritti 


Sa()t;t-padarthi 


-vyakhya 


142 
14  i 
144 
145 
1  • 
14/ 
148 
149  Siddhanta-mnktavalr-prftkasa 


Sibdartha-tai-kararita 
Siirabandhopadesa 

...  -tika     - 

Siddhauta-chandrika 
Siddhanta-tattva-viveka 


Koiida  Bhatta. 
Prasastapada. 
Ny  ay  a  vac  hasp  at  i. 
Krisna  Miara. 
Saiikara.-harya. 
Untraced- 

Jayarama  NyayapafichAuana. 
Laugaksi    Bhaskara. 

Untraeed. 
Gropinat.ha  Muni. 
Untraced. 
Sarvadeva  Pun'. 
Visva  tar,ha    Pafichanana. 

Sankara  Afiara.- 
Ma  lhava  Sarasvati. 
Grokulai  at,ha. 
Visvanadia. 
Prithvidhara  Acharya. 


Harira:na. 
Grada  1  hava. 
Malhava  Vadindra. 
Padmar.a'.ha  MiSra. 
jldaya  i:.  A  -harya. 
Sosa  oa>  anoradhra. 
Math  11 1  a  arha  Tarkavagiaa. 
Krisua    M-sra. 
Bha\adeva  Pandita  Kavi. 
K  ana.  la 

San  kara  M  ;'fira. 
Udayana     Acharya  ;    ChandrA- 

11  anda. 
Havana  /  Raghudeva;  Chandra- 

kit    :  a, 

Vijfia  ia  Bhikau. 
Jay  a    a  ay  an  a. 
Bht>ja  ? 


Hari. 


Mi'lra. 


Jaykriana  (or  Kriana  Maunin) 

Baugadasa. 

Gobardhana.      .  ^  •_.   -. 

Kriana  Dhurjati  DJksita.  , 

Gokulanatha.  -'v 

Q-opinatha  Maani. 


A  P  PEN  J)  I  X  11. 
INDEX  OF  WORDS. 


wfir 


i  n  i  u  :  in  13  n  :  *  n  iv. 


*.nn  • 
inn 
i«iii^ 
urn  : 


APPENDIX  II. 


HIS 


314 


APPENDIX  II. 


«4 


•m 


mi 


IRK    ; 


IRK  -, 


IRU 


Mill* 

iir 

n  i 


m  IH  ; 


sTTcjnjur 


arm 


1111*  ;   11111*  ; 


srr1? 


APPENDIX  II. 


315 


<*  1  1  1  1 


5  «mi  ; 


M1IU 


nun  : 


1RI%1 


'-Rll  i 
1RI*  : 
'-hl"> 


11%  111  : 


APVUN'WX  II. 


:     1RR 


1RR 


1M!^   :   Hill* 
:   1I1R*  :    1R|1 


1RR 


APPENDIX  II 


317 


Rll  : 


:   1RR 


*RR 


*I 
ifr 

*fr 
•ftc 


:     IhK; 
;    ^hho- 

^' 


;    IRIS,  -,   iRlu 


5    S  111 


mm 


APPENDIX  II 


mi« ; 
mi*  ? 


319 


1RR  : 


firflrei 


;  »Ri** 
•,  <m|1* 
;1°RI^ 


320 


1RI11  5 


5   1RI11 


51T5TT 


Ulil    , 


:  1I1R1 
1I1R*  ;  1RR 


5RR' 


IIIR 


*hll     ; 


APPENDIX  II 


32 1 


qasr 


qr 


322 


APPENDIX  II 


•,  imu 


APPENDIX  II 


32S 


fsr^Tsf 

f^flfllZ  *|1|1<S  : 

fsrsta  in i*  ? 


-,»mi» 


11111  •, 


S24 


APPENDIX  II 


•;o ; 

JT 


1'llh 


*RI1* 
*RI1* 
*R|1« 


APPENDIX  II 


325 


1111*5 


«o  {— — 


R1 


3(1 


326 


APPENDIX  II 


^17  {i 


i  o  : 


APPENDIX  II 


327 


Is 


APPEND!  X— III. 
INDEX  OF  APHORISMS. 

j   o  — Words  left  out  by  *9we  editor*  are  shown  within  brackets. 


.     V.ii,  13 

...    Hi,  i,  6 


...  I,  ii,  6 
...  in,  i,  7 


...  II,  ii,  6 


:     ...     VII,  it  14 


:    ...    VII,  i,  16 


...      VII,  i,  11 

:  ...  IV,  ii,  4 


...   VII,  i,  8 

...  VII,  i,  10 


V,  ii,  17 


v,  H,  a 

srqi 
V,  ii,  3 


tan  ...  IX,  ii,  12 

...  VI,  ii,  12 


...  II,  i,  13 

:V,i, 

:  ...  II,  iii  28 
...  VII,  i,  18 

,i,5 

...  IV,  ii,  6  i 
,.Lii,  11 


V.ii,  11 
in%5ts 
q^:  ...  HI,  i,  15 


...  VII,  i,  4 

..  II,  ii,  5 


V,  i,  5 


:  ...  V,  i,  3 

T«[^ 
...  II,  ii,  30 


...     IV,  i,  8 


:  ...  VII,  ii,  9 


..    VI,  ii,  2 

c 
fq  ...  X,  i,  4 


329     ) 


...  VI,  ii.  8 


ii,  17 


...  VIII,  ii,  1 

...  IV,  i,  12 

...  VIII,  ii,  3 
...  VI,  ii,  7 

nrfT^qrSifT^:  III,  i,  8 
'...  IV,  i,  5 

...  VII,  i   21 
:  ...    VI,  ii,  6 
...  VI,  ii,  9 

VII. 


...  IX,  i,  11 

^T:  5ET%J 

:  IX,  ii,  6 


...  IX,  i,  15 


VI,  i,  5 


ii,  15 


:^   V, 


...  IX,  i,  3 

T?J 

...  IX,  i,  6 


...  I,  i,  26 


...  IX,  i, 


,  ii,  5 


...  IX,  ii,  2 


,...IX,ii,  1 
arsfjrfrr  sr?*jnTcJTftr  *rar^  qt^ni 
r:  .  .  Ill,  ii,  14 


III,  ii,  18 


III,  ii,  9 


...  V,  i,  6 


...  VI,  i!,  16 


...  Ill,  i,  18 


...  Ill,  ii,  1 


(  tfrtft  )  If  ii;  14 


:  IX, 


VI,  ii,  14 


...     II,  ii,  10 


...     IX,  ii,  10 


...     Ill,  i,  2 


:  ...   X,i,  1 


)     ...      VII,  ii,  26 


(  ^*fffft»T  )   I,  i,  7 
:    ...   .1,  i,  13 


330     ) 


VII,  i»  12 

VII,  ii,  6 


:  VII,  i,  15 


I,  ii,  15 


:  VII,  ii,  3  ;     II,  i,  2 


VII,  ii,  21 


cSITr     ...    VII,  '; 


''»  23 
I^ 

,  ]'  17 


X,  i,  6 

c^ftr^l 

H^T  «wH^ 

...     V,  ii,  22 


VIM,  0 


^^   ...  X,  ii,  0 


VII,  ii,  22 


...    VII,  i,  (.) 

r^TR:  ...  IV,  i,  3 


X,  ii,  1 


13 


...  I,  i,  31 

Hrr^rf^ft  *T<JTT;  V,  ii.  2t 

T  T   ...  Ill,   i,  4 

fe*  ...  II, 


i    22 


ii,  16 


f  ii,  10  (     VIII,  i,  11 
ii    3     '   ^>T'^t  *Fr«?:  ...  VII,  i)  25 
:  .  .  V,  ii,  20 


§ 

,i,  12 


...  X,  ii,  3 


X,  ii,  5 


>  i,  10 


IX,  i,  8 


•••  Ij  1?  a 

...  VII,  ii,  24 


...  VII,  ii,  12 


f^^r  ...  VII,  ii,  7 
I,  i,  14 


J  ...  Hi  i,  25 
...  IILi,  5 


(     331 
II,  i,  12 


V,  ii,  9 


IV,  ii,  5 
?T5f  Tcfrr 


IX,  i,  1 


VIII,  i,  8 


ii, 


i,  14 


...   V  1  1  1  ,  i  ,  2 

...      IX, 


ITTJTT: 


...    \rl,  ii,  15 

I,  i,  19 


VIII,  i,  4 

VII,  ii,  14 


ii,  13 


i, 


...     V,  i,  J< 

..     V,  i,  12 


i  24 
*r 

,  ii,  25 


II,  ii,  15 

^lT 

12 


...  IX    ,i, 


VII,  ii,  25 

:  ...  V,  ii,  25  ;  VII, 


VII,  ii,  15 


,  i,  29 

rp:T3r 

VI,  n,  3 


VI,  ii,  13 


VIII,  i,  3 

f^?T^      ...         II,  i,  5 
...        II,  i,  29:    II,  ii,  8; 

II,  ii,  12;  VII,  ii,  28 


...VIII,  ii,  6 

...    VII,  ii,  2 

..     VI,  i,  4 

...     IX, 


i,  7 

JT 

X,  ii,  4 


:    ...     VI,   i,  13 
IX,  ii,  7 


V,  i,  2 


I,  i,  3;  X,  ii,  9. 


...    IX,  ii,  LI 

...      VI,  i,  6 

...     VI,  i,   9 

)    .  ,  . 


(     332     ) 

jwftr    ?\x\T&f      IT 

:     ...     V,  ii,  16 
II, 


VI,  ii,  1 


i,  31 


...      VIL  i,  23 


X,  ii,  8 

VII,  i,  13 

...  VIII, 


V,  11,  18 
i^fo^^ 
II  i,  21 


VI,    ii,  11 


X,  i,  3 


•    II,  i,  17 

:  III,  ii,  8 

i 


III,  11,  2,   III,  ii,  5 

wftrsr  r^rcrtf  ^t*     ...     VI, 

i,  8 

:    ...    IV,  i,  10 


.      IT,  ii,  22 
...    V,  i.    11 
II,  ii,  4 

V,  ii  20 
...     II,  i,  3 


12 


:     ...      Ill,  ii, 


Ill,  11,  15 


...     V,  ii,  4 


I,  i  ,l8 
[5^T  OT^ 

V,Ti,  19 
^m 

ii    8 


...    I, 


...    I,  ii,  5 


IV,  i,  9 


...  II,  i,  7 


...     V,  iit  21 

VI,    i,7 
...     II,  ii>  18 


VII,  a,  27 
[5'«*Rc?ic% 

II,n,  7  ;  II,  ii  11 


II.  i.  28 
,  i,  23 


...   I,  i,   10 


irr?f 


)  I,  i,  16 

VIII,  i,  7 
VIII,  i,  1 


:  III,  11,  11 


VIII,  i,  10 


(    333    ) 
II,  ii,  33 


...   I,  i,  25 


,  i»  4 


..  IV,  ii,  7 


...  IX,  ii,  9 


II,  i,  10 


...   II,  ii,  29 

:    I,  ii,  2 


«T    <J 


..   Ill,  ii,  17 

...  I,  i,  12 

...  I,  ii  21 

.V,  ii,  5 

...II,  ii;  24 

flrf  ^Tclt  ^l 
..  IX,  i,  10 

...    VII,  i,  20 

...  H^  ii,  27 

T    ...    VII,  i,  lg 


...    V,  ii,  1 


V,  i,  8 


...!!^,  26 


s?n^m:...Vii,  u,  23 

...II,  i,  27 
:    ...     VI,   i,    10 


»  ii,  1 


...    VII,  i,  2 


...,  ,  5 


...    II,  ii,  9 


)    ...    II,  i,  20 

...    VII,  ii,  16 


V,  ii,  23 
r« 

...  vii,  ii  4, 


J  ...  V,  i,  10 
{^fTfTcn^ 
*  ^  V,  i,17 
,  ii,  6 


TO:  v&ft 

...    V>  ii,  12 


:  II,  i,  19 


...    IV,  ii,  2 
...  II,  ii,  34 

:...  V,  i,  9 


III,  ii,  3 


III,  i,   19 

:  ...  Ill,  i,  i 

...III,  i,  14 


)  III,  ii,  4 

...   VI,  i,  1 

rr:  ...  VI,  i,  3 

vi,  i,  2 


(     334     ) 
...VI,  ii,  4 


...  I,  i,  28 

:  $TSc[:   ...   IT,  ii,  32 


I,  ii,  4 


...III,  i,  12 
...  Ill,  i,  13 


...    II,  *  ,  15 


II,  i,  1-i 


;fa:   ...  VIII,  ii,  5 
...    VII,  ii,  5 


V,  i.  15 

T?. 

i,  (i 


w>gr:    IV, 

...   IX,  i,   •"> 

HT?T^PTT 
...  III.  ii,  (> 


^T*S[FT:  ...  II,  ii,  20 
VII, 


i,  22 


...  Ill,  i,  11 
...  VI,  i-  I'J 


51* 


II,  i,  8 

V,  ii,  7 


I,  i,  2 


T  ...  V,  i,  13 

II,  ii,  10 


...   IV,  ii  11 
t*r  ...  V,  ii,  10 

I    i    >>7 
...   -«•>  i,  — — 

5TT5TT   ...   Ill,  ii,  20 


, 


:   ...  VI,  ii,  5 
III,  ii,  10 


II,  i,  30 


.  .  Ill,  i,  10 
lftf?r    ^T 
Tfrarq;  ...  Ill,  i,  17 


...  VII,  ii,  18 
...   Ill,  ii,  21 


...  VII,  ii,  13 
II»  i,  1 


...  VII,  ii,  1 

:    ^f^TT; 


...  IX,  i,  4 

W  *l^1^3[f5TTr^...X,  i,  5 
...II,  ii,  26 


:}   ...   I,  ir  G 
Tq 
II,  i,  2 


...     IX,  i,  2 


T.ii,  7 


(     335     ) 


...    IV,li  10 


III,  11,  16 
r 

30 


...      II,  ii,  35 


VII  I,  i,  Q< 


..     IV,  ii, 


VI,  i,  15 


VI,  i,  11 


ii,  20 
IflP 
i,  lOj  III,  ii,  7 


II,  ii, 


VIII,  i,  (5 


ar     ...     I,  ii. 

10;    I,    il,    12:    I,   ii,     14;      I,    ii,      16 


...     VIII,  i,  5 

,ii,  3 


...IV,  i,  11 


II,  i,  18 


IV,  ii,  9 

..x,ii,  7 


:  VII,  ii,  11 


I,  i,  20 


,    , 


^m^:  2R*jfoTJ...II,  i,  23 


II,  11,  31 


II,  i,  6 
...     VII, 

TT          VII,  11,  H) 
j.  j_, 


V,  i,  7 


..    Ill,  i, 
af 

X,  i,  2 


V,  i,  18 


:    ...     II,  i,  4 
:     ...     II,  i,  9 

...     IX,  ii,  8 


III,  ii,  19 

:...VI,  ii/  10 
,  i,  3 


37 


V,  i,  11 


V,  ii,  14 


:     ...     VI,  i,  14 
STOHJf 

IX,  ii, 


BINDING  SECT.     OCT  2    19»i 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


B 

132 
V2K3 
1923 


Kanada 

The  Vaisesika  sutras  of 
Kanada  2d  ed.,   rev.   and  enl. 


